ASHLEY PAIRITZ 05/07/2007

Ashley is 22 years old. She has a skin condition and some foot problems.
She has had a hernia repair when she was 5. She has a skin condition
that would come and go. She has eczema on her left hand. She finally
went to a dermatologist who treated it and that condition has not
returned since the spring of 2006.


1.  Pain in the jaws on a daily basis with chewing and even talking.

2.  Headaches.

3.  Difficulty eating and chewing.

4.  Difficulties breathing through her nose and predominately a mouth
    breather.

5.  Mild snoring and daytime tiredness.

Ashley's problems began as far as she is aware of when she was about 19
years old. This was when she started college and the stresses of college
she believes caused her to clench and grind her teeth. It was at this
time that she developed some of the pain problems. However, previous to
that time she had orthodontics at the age of 12 with a Herbst appliance
and a palatal expander. She was then placed in full braces from the age
of 13 to 16. She developed the problems as mentioned above and then she
went back into braces in October of 2006 and these were placed by Dr.
Kingdon Brady, in West Lafayette, Indiana. She has had several splints
starting in October of 2004. She even had acupuncture performed in
September of 2006 but this gave her very short-term relief.

She currently takes aspirin p.r.n. for pain and she takes birth control
pills. She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus and occasional
vertigo. The only other joints that really bother her include her right
hand. She has an allergy to penicillin. She is aware of clenching and
bruxing at night and also she clenches during the day.

She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function 5,
diet at 5, disability at 5. She gets headaches 3 to 4 times per week at
a level of 6 that occur behind her eyes and probably involve the frontal
and temporal areas.

In frontal view, Ashley has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 3 mm. Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much
on the facial midline. There may be just a slight orbital dystopia with
the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side. In the
profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by
probably about 3 mm. Maxilla is AP deficient by probably a good 6 to 8
mm. Chin is retruded by about 15+ mm. Chin-neckline is short and
chin-neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, she is missing the
first bicuspids in all 4 quadrants. She has some buildups on the crowns
of the second molars. She has braces on all the lower teeth except for
the left second molar. She has appliances on all the upper posterior
teeth. In centric relation she has an end-on Class II cuspid
relationship being about 3 to 4 mm Class II. She has an anterior open
bite of about 2 mm. Slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side
being about 1 mm higher than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look
healthy. The uvula and soft palate are relatively normal.

ASHLEY PAIRITZ 05/07/2007 Page 2

Faucial pillars look moderately constricted. Intranasally, the septum is
deviated just slightly off to the right side at the base. Turbinates
appear fairly large and a little bit boggy that seems to cause some
significant airway obstruction. She does have some mild to moderate
snoring. Apparently the history of snoring was greater when she was
younger as compared to now. She does have daytime somnolence of probably
a moderate amount. She is not aware of overt sleep apnea problems. To
palpation, she has really severe pain over the TMJs and high moderate
pain over the styloid area, masseters, moderate pain over the
temporalis, SCMs and milder tenderness over the medial pterygoids at the
posterior neck area. Maximal incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursive
movement to the right is 7, left 10 mm.


Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars and all 4 first
bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderately
enlarged. Condyles appear small and a little bit arthritic.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. The bony
septum is reasonably straight with a little bit deviation off to the
right side. Turbinates are enlarged particularly on the left side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned and
superiorly positioned in the fossa. A little pseudocyst in the condylar
head. Articular eminence is quite long and fairly steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have undergone some
resorption. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space.
Articular eminence is extremely long and more vertical than the opposite
side. There appears to be some anterior beaking on the condyle. There
may be a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. On opening, there is
restricted translation although the condyles come down to the posterior
aspect of the slope of the eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Ashley has a high occlusal
plane angle facial morphology and anterior open bite. She has a retruded
maxilla and mandible. Oropharyngeal airway is significantly decreased.
She appears to have significant adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx.
Oropharyngeal airway between the turbinate and the adenoid tissue
appears to be about 4 mm. Airway space at the base of the tongue of the
posteropharyngeal wall is about 4 to 5 mm and the base of the tongue
appears to be approximately 6 to 7 mm. She has a head postured forward
neck position.


1.  Bilateral TMJ resorptive arthritis and articular disc dislocation
    without reduction.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

5.  AP mandibular deficiency.

6.  High occlusal plane angle.

ASHLEY PAIRITZ 05/07/2007 Page 3

7.  Class II end-on occlusion.

8.  Anterior open bite.

9.  Occluding only on the second molars with all other teeth out of
    occlusion.

10. Hypertrophied turbinates.

11. Hypertrophied adenoid tissue.

12. Nasal airway obstruction.

13. Prominently a mouth breather.

14. Missing all 4 first bicuspids and all 4 third molars.

15. TMJ pain.

16. Headaches.

17. Myofascial pain.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the mandible
        forward in a counterclockwise direction (approximately 18 mm.)

    c.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 8 mm
        and downgraft it posteriorly to level the occlusal plane.

    d.  Bilateral inferior turbinectomies.

    e.  Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
