BRANDON PENNINGTON 05/12/2008

Brandon is 16 years old, referred by Tom Lowder, DDS, MS, 2709 W.
Huntsville Avenue, Springdale, Arkansas 72762. Brenda is in good health

1.  Jaws are out of alignment.

2.  Teeth do not fit together properly.

3.  Lower jaw is retruded.

Brandon has no problems with headaches, TMJ problems. No earaches,
tinnitus, or vertigo. He has a little problem with his left ankle due to
a trampoline injury. He is not aware of clenching or bruxing his teeth.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Brandon has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is zero. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the
facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be off to the left side 1
or 2 mm. Chin is pretty much on the facial midline, however, he is
missing one of his lower central incisors, probably the right one. In
profile view, Brandon has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about
5 to 6 mm. The chin is retruded by about 15 mm. The lower third face
appears long. Chin neckline appears short, although the chin neck angle
is fairly well defined. Intraorally, Brandon has retained C’s on the
left side and may be missing the D’s or the E’s. In the upper arch, he
has retained C’s, D’s, and E’s. He has an approximately 7 mm anterior
open bite. He is pretty close to being a Class I. He has an accentuated
curve of Spee in the upper arch. He has an accentuated curve of Wilson
in both the upper and lower arch. There is probably around 4 mm of lip
incompetence. The oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. The uvula is
moderately enlarged. His soft palate is moderately elongated. The
fascial pillars are moderately constricted. Tonsils appear relatively
normal. Intranasally, the turbinates are perhaps mildly enlarged, but
there appears to be adequate airway. He has no history of sleep apnea or
snoring problems. Joints function smoothly. No tenderness to palpation
around the head and neck area.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. He is also missing all four lower bicuspids as well as both
central incisors. He has a retained primary and left incisor and there
is a retained primary cuspid on the left side. In the upper arch, he is
missing all four bicuspids. He has retained C’s, D’s, and E’s. Sinuses
look relatively clear. Joints look relatively normal.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight.
Turbinates appear quite large and appear to obliterate a significant
part of the nasal airway. This is more in the posterior aspect of the
nose than the anterior. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has good morphology and there is
good joint space present.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and
good joint space. Articular eminences are moderately steep in both
joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Brandon has an AP maxillary
deficiency, posterior vertical maxillary excess, and AP mandibular
deficiency. He has some adenoid tissue remaining in the nasopharynx and
this is in fairly close approximation to the posterior aspect of the
turbinates. The oropharyngeal airway, however, looks adequate. The lower
incisors appear to be in a lingual inclination. Mandibular occlusal
plane angle appears high, but maxillary occlusal plane angle appears
fairly flat.


1.  AP maxillary deficiency.

2.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary excess.

4.  AP mandibular deficiency.

5.  High occlusal plane angle in the mandible.

6.  Occluding only the posterior first and second molars with all other
    teeth out of occlusion.

7.  Severe apertognathia.

8.  Class II cuspid relatively.

9.  Missing all 8 permanent bicuspids.

10. Missing maxillary lateral incisors.

11. Missing mandibular central incisors.

12. Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.

13. Reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch.

14. Hypertrophied turbinates.

15. Partial nasal airway obstruction.

16. Retrained primary mandibular left C and E, right E, left incisor. In
    the upper arch, retained primary C, D, and E bilaterally.

17. Partial erupted maxillary left cuspid, unerupted maxillary right
    cuspid.


1.  Pre-orthodontic extractions.

    a.  Extract primary C and D’s (maintain the primary E’s).

    b.  Extract mandibular left C and primary central incisor (maintain
        the E’s).

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Retract the permanent cuspids
        and maintain spacing between the cuspids and the central
        incisors of about 6 mm to accommodate implants for replacement
        of lateral incisors.

    b.  Align and level the lower arch. Open up spacing in the midline
        to accommodate the width of two lower central incisors to equal
        a total of 8 to 10 mm. Other option would be to pull the two
        incisors to the midline and open spaces between the incisors and
        the cuspids.

3.  Surgery, Stage 1.

    a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and move
        the posterior aspect superiorly.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Surgery Stage 2.

    a.  Placement of implants in the edentulous areas. Consider
        extraction of the four retained E’s for placement of implants,
        or, if the teeth are sturdy, maintain them for as long as they
        remain functional.

6.  Restorative dentistry to place crowns on the osseointegrated dental
    implants.
