KARLA RAMIREZ 08/11/2008

Karla is 18 years old and referred by Marco Navarro, DDS, 2501
Cornerstone, Edinburg, TX 78539, telephone #956-972-0013. Karla is in
good health with no major medical problems. She takes Advil as her only
medication. She had previous orthodontics from the age of 12 to 13 and
then she began orthodontics again on May 18, 2007. She had maxillary
second bicuspids and mandibular first bicuspids extracted as well as all
four third molars removed. She has been under orthodontic treatment
since that time. The spaces in the arches are getting close to being
etiology. The only treatment she has had to date has been orthodontic
treatment. Karla gets headaches 2 to 3 times a week in the temporal
areas bilaterally at about a level of 7. She gets pain in the left TMJ
at a level of 3, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 4, diet at 6,
and disability at 4.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Karla has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is zero. Maxillary midline is about 2 mm off to
the left side. The mandibular dental midline is a little bit closer to
being on the facial midline as is the chin. Karla has fairly good
balance between her upper lips, cheeks, and nose. Chin appears retruded
and probably 10 to 12 AP deficient. Chin neckline is a little bit short,
although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally,
she is missing the lower first bicuspids. She has Class III mechanics on
from lower bicuspid to upper first molars. She has an anterior deep bite
of at least 5 to 6 mm. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower
arch and a slightly reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch. She has a
full Class II occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues appear
normal. Tonsils are slightly enlarged particularly on the right side.
She does have some mild snoring. Karla has a Bolton's difference of 2.75
mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars, the maxillary second bicuspids, and lower first bicuspids.
Sinuses look relatively clear.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The turbinates are fairly
large and appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway. Nasal septum is
reasonably straight in the bony area.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there might be some decreased joint space
vertically.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be reasonable joint space
present. The condyle has fairly good morphology and articular eminence
is moderately steep. On opening, there is good translation of both
joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II
and dental Class II occlusal relationship. There is a slightly increased
occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm at the
soft palate level and closer to 4 mm at the base on the tongue. To
palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. On
opening, she has some noise in her joints, but it may be the condyles
coming out over the articular eminence more so than a disc displacement.
However, it is possible that she may have displaced discs, but make no
noises. Karla has an external nasal deformity with a dorsal hump
present. She would like to have this removed. Therefore, a rhinoplasty

1.  Removal of the dorsal hump.

2.  Narrow the transverse width of the nose and the tip of the nose.


1.  Probable bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.

2.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

3.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  Class II occlusion.

6.  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of
    approximately 3..5 to 4 mm (normal 11 mm).

7.  Snoring.

8.  Daytime tiredness.

9.  Missing maxillary second bicuspids, mandibular first bicuspids.

10. Hypertrophied turbinates.

11. Nasal airway obstruction.

12. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 3 mm.

13. TMJ pain.

14. Headaches.

15. External nasal deformity.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Open at least 1 mm
          of space between the maxillary laterals and cuspids to help
          compensate for the significant tooth size discrepancy of 3 mm.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Continue to close up the
          posterior space, but try to lose posterior anchorage so the
          lower incisors are not overly retracted.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors, if confirmed that the discs are displaced.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward slightly
          and down graft it posterior as well as correct any transverse
          discrepancies that may be present.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a counterclockwise direction.

    d.  External rhinoplasty.

3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
