ELISA SOLOMON 07/07/2008

Elisa is 22 years old. For the most part, she is in good health. She has
had cataract surgery in her left eye and has about 85% loss of vision in
that eye. She has had her wisdom teeth removed. Primary concerns that
Lisa has includes the following.

1.  Pain throughout the face, jaws, neck, back, and head that is
    constant.

2.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

3.  Headaches that are fairly constant.

Elisa believes that her jaw problems began when she was about 14 years
that time, but she did not have the headaches then. Her headaches began
when she was probably about 17 or 18 years of age. More recently, in the
last several months, they have gotten progressively worse to where they
are constant.


1.  Allegra.

2.  Cyclessa (BCP).

3.  Trazodone 25 mg q.h.s.

4.  Ibuprofen, Tylenol, and Aleve for pain control.

She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus, but gets occasional
vertigo. The only other joint areas that bother her could be her neck
and her back, although she cannot differentiate whether it is in the
bone structures or in the muscles only. She is aware of clenching and
bruxing at night time and also during the day. She rates her headaches
at 8 and they are constant through the entire head area. She rates her
TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 9, jaw function at 6, diet at 7,
and disability at 5.


1.  Retainers prior to orthodontics to align and rotate some teeth.

2.  1996 through 1999 orthodontic treatment with retainers following.

3.  She had splint therapy x2 from 2001 and she continues with a splint
    through 2008.

4.  She had physical therapy from 2007 to 2008.

5.  She has had medications tried. Elavil was tried, but it gave her
    tachycardia. She currently takes trazodone for sleep and to help
    decrease clenching.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Elisa has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 to 3 mm. The maxillary, mandibular,
and chin midline are pretty much aligned on the facial midline. In
profile view, Elisa has slight deficiency in the maxillary projection of
probably about 3 mm or so. Chin appears retruded by about 10-12 mm. Chin
neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.
She has some fullness in the submental area. Intraorally, Elisa has all
of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well
aligned and level with just some mild crowding in the lower anterior
arch. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of
her teeth back through the second molars. She has small upper lateral
incisors and one on the left side is pegged shaped. She has a slight
Class II end-on cuspid relationship being a little bit more Class II on
the left side than right side. She is probably 2 to 3 mm Class III. She
has about a 1-mm overbite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look
relatively normal. The tonsils look normal. The turbinates are moderate
in size and create some nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, she has
some moderate pain over the TMJs, but minor pain over the masseters,
SCMs, shoulders. On opening, the left joint functions relatively smooth,
but on the right side she has a pop at about 35 mm of opening and
closing at about 30 mm. Maximal opening is 50 mm, but opening without
significant discomfort to only about 14 mm. Excursion movements are 12
mm in each direction.

Elisa has an MRI report from an MRI taken July 13, 2007, that shows that
she has a disc displaced in the left TMJ anteriorly that reduces with
mouth opening. On the right side, the disc is anteriorly displaced and
also is reported to reduce. Her films are not available at this time.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. She has a pegged left lateral incisors. Sinuses appear
relatively clear. The left condyle and right condyle may have some
arthritic changes associated with them.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Nasal septum in
the bony area is relatively straight. The turbinates are moderately
enlarged with greater obstruction of the airway on the left side and
just slightly better airway on the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram had been taken in centric relation as the condyle is
postured down and forward in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately
steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also appears to postured down
and forward slightly. The posterior teeth do not appear to be together.
Articular eminence is moderate in steepness. The patient may not have
been in centric relation when the closed tomograms were taken. On
opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she is postured forward.


1.  Bilateral TMJ and lessened internal condylar resorption.

2.  AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

5.  Class II end-on occlusion.

6.  High occlusal plane angle.

7.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

8.  TMJ pain.

9.  Headaches.

10. Myofascial pain.

11. Left maxillary pegged lateral incisor.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Open approximately 2 mm of space
        around the maxillary left lateral incisor and 1 mm of space
        between the maxillary right lateral incisor and cuspid.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.


  Option 1. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament
  repair with Mitek

  anchor.

  Option 2. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
  prostheses and mandibular advancement.

b.  Mandibular advancement with sagittal split osteotomies for option 1
    and total joint prostheses for option 2.

c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
    counterclockwise direction.

d.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts if TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses are
    used.

e.  Possible bilateral coronoplasties if total joint prostheses are
    used.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

4.  Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors
    with bonding, veneers, or crowns.
