EVAN SNIDER 03/13/2007

Evan was referred by Dr. Warner Young. His father is Mr. Greg Snider,
14344 174^(th) Ave. NE, Redmond, WA 98052.

Evan, when he began seeing Dr. Young, was a skeletal Class I nonsurgical
patient with a basic Class I occlusion. Evan, however, grew into a Class
III jaw relationship. Dr. Young believes that he has condylar
hyperplasia because of the abnormal growth. Based on the records
provided to include photographs, Panorex and 2 cephalograms, Evan's

1.  Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

2.  Mandibular prognathism.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

5.  Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the left side as compared
    to the right side.

6.  Anterior open bite of approximately 3 mm.

7.  Bilateral posterior crossbites and an anterior crossbite.

8.  Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.

9.  Reverse curve of Wilson with buccal tipping of the mandibular left
    second bicuspid first molar.

10. Nasal airway obstruction.

11. Hypertrophied turbinates.

12. Rule out deviated nasal septum.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Consider placing a
        step and archwire to align the 4 incisors and slightly elevate
        the occlusal plane to the cuspids and posterior teeth.

    b.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Try to correct the
        buccal tipping of the left second bicuspid and first molar.

    c.  Continue to monitor facial growth and development.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies to arrest the abnormal
        and reposition the articular disc with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in
        a counterclockwise direction and align the facial midline.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, expand,
        and level the occlusal plane.

    d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    e.  Consider possible nasal septoplasty if contributory to nasal
        airway obstruction.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
