TAYLOR WOODWORTH 11-24-04

Taylor is 14 years old and referred by Dr. Maryam Mojdehi-Barnes, 1223
W. McDermott Drive, #15, Allen, TX 75013.

Patient Concerns

1.  Jaw joints pop

2.  Jaw locks up particularly on the right side

3.  Bite doesn’t fit very well, and he has at least three different
    bites

4.  Crossbite

5.  Nose always stopped up

6.  Predominantly breathes through mouth

7.  Disruptive sleep pattern

8.  Wakes up a lot at night

9.  Snoring

10. Significant tiredness during the day

11. No other joint problems

Patient History

Taylor has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or hearing loss but does
sometimes have some lightheadedness and dizziness. No other joints
He has had no treatment for his jaw problems to date. He gets weekly
headaches that occur at about a level of 6 in the temporal and posterior
head area. He does get fairly severe migraines about two times per month
that generally occur at a level of 8. They have been getting
progressively worse as far as magnitude and increased time frequency.
His headaches began about the same time his TMJ problems began,
particularly the migraine-type headaches. Sometimes these headaches can
get to a level of 10. He rates his TMJ pain at 4, overall average daily
pain at 2, jaw function at 7, diet at 3, and disability at 4.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Taylor has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5
mm. Maxillary midline is shifted off to the left side a couple of
millimeters. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the
facial midline as is the chin.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is fairly close to being in
alignment with subnasale. Maxilla appears to be AP deficient by probably
about 6 mm. Mandible is retruded by probably 20 to 25 mm. Chin-neckline
is extremely short and chin-neckline is not really well-defined. Taylor
tends to hold his head so that his mandible is rotated forward, head
tipped backward, and his chin postured forward. He has a head held
forward neck posture.

Intraorally, Taylor has all of his lower teeth back through the second
molars. Teeth are fairly well-aligned. Has acceptable attached gingiva
around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he has all of his
teeth back through the second molars. Has a slight Class III cuspid
relationship on the right side of about 1 to 2 mm, and on the left side
it is closer to about 4 to 5 mm. Does have an anterior crossbite with an
end-on incisor relationship. Oropharynx area appears relatively clear.
Uvula is elongated. Soft palate looks relatively normal in length
although could be mildly elongated. Faucial pillars may be a little bit
constricted but not too bad. Tonsils are present and of moderate size.

Intranasally, the septum looks reasonably straight. Turbinates are quite
enlarged probably contributory to his nasal airway problems and probably
to his allergy problems. On opening and closing, he has clicking and
popping in both joints. On opening, it is a little bit more difficult to
identify, but on the left side it appeared it occurred around 15 mm of
opening, and on the right side at probably 20. On closing, it occurs at
about 15 mm on the right side and 5 mm on the left side. Maximal opening
is about 54 mm, and excursive movement to the right 9 mm and to the left
7 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four developing third molars with
inadequate space to erupt into position. The rest of the teeth are all
present. He has a root canal on the mandibular right second molar.
Sinuses look a little bit cloudy. Condyle is fairly flattened
anteriorly.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively cloudy. Nose shows
that the right turbinate is significantly larger than the left. Seems to
be more obstruction in the vertical midportion of the nasal cavity.
Frontal sinuses are rather larger but also are clear. Maxillary sinuses
are clear.

Left TMJ tomograms show a joint that seems to have fairly good space.
Articular eminence is a little bit shallow. Joint space appears fairly
well-balanced but difficult to tell for sure.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly
positioned in the fossa. Some flattening of the anterior head and some
anterior beaking present.

On opening, he has good translation of both condyles.

Cephalometrically, Taylor has a high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal
airway actually looks fairly good. Has a skeletal Class II relationship
but a slight Class III occlusal relationship. Appears that Taylor has a
tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of about 4 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with
    reduction on the left side and nonreducing on the right side

2.  AP maxillary deficiency

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

4.  Transverse maxillary excess

5.  AP mandibular deficiency

6.  AP microgenia

7.  Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the left side as compared
    to the right side

8.  Maxillary midline shifted to the left 2 mm

9.  Severe headaches

10. Decreased oropharyngeal airway

11. Snoring

12. Hypertrophied turbinates

13. Nasal airway obstruction

14. Sleep apnea symptoms

15. Restless sleep

16. Daytime somnolence

17. Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars

18. Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 to 3 mm

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
        osteotomies

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth
        removing approximately 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to help
        correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

2.  Surgery

    A.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, downgraft
        it posteriorly, and correct any transverse discrepancy

    C.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction

    D.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies

    E.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4

    F.  Augmentation genioplasty

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
