PAUL LUTZ 06-21-04

Paul is 47-year-old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller, 3929 Bayless Ave.,
St. Louis, MO 32125.

Patient History

Paul has had previous surgery for a deviated nasal septum. Otherwise he
is in good health. Takes Lipitor 40 mg once per day. Has an adverse
reaction to PENICILLIN LIQUID. Paul has no problems with earaches,
tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother him. Is not
aware of nocturnal clenching or bruxism. He feels best in the mornings,
and the pain is worse in the evening. He feels that he breathes a lot
through his mouth when sleeping.

Patient Concerns

1.  TMJ pain

2.  Headaches

3.  Grating noises particularly in the left TMJ

4.  Bite doesn’t fit

5.  Open bite

6.  Crossbite

7.  Snoring

8.  Predominant mouth breather

9.  Difficulties eating

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Paul has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Some asymmetry in the nose. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper
tooth-to-lip relationship may be about -2 mm. Maxillary dental midline,
mandibular dental midline, and chin are all pretty much on the facial
midline.

In profile view, Paul appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency. Chin
is significantly AP deficient being probably 20 mm retruded.
Chin-neckline is not well-defined at all. Has a head postured forward
neck position. Has pretty much about a 90-degree nasolabial angle. A
little bit of ptosis of the nasal tip.

Intraorally, Paul is missing the mandibular right second and third molar
and left second and third molar. The rest of the teeth are present. Some
very minimal crowding, lower anterior arch. Has fairly good attached
gingiva except for around the cuspids it is thin and the central
incisors are quite thin as well. In the upper arch, she is missing the
second and third molars on the right side. On the left side is missing
the second bicuspid and all three molars. Could be just a slight Class
II cuspid relationship by maybe 1 to 2 mm. Paul does have an anterior
open bite of probably 2 to 3 mm. Has a crossbite on the right side
including the bicuspids and molars. Left cuspid is probably 2 mm lower
than the right cuspid in the upper arch.

In frontal view, the mandible appears to be shifted off toward the right
side, the anterior part.

Oropharynx appears relatively normal. Transverse dimension between the
faucial pillars may be just slightly constricted.

Intranasally, he has some deviation of the nasal septum off to the right
side and then there is a spur off to the left side. Turbinates are
moderately enlarged. Luminal valves seem a little bit constricted. He
does have nasal airway obstruction.

He has some mild tenderness over the TMJs, temporalis areas, styloid
areas, shoulders, and left masseter area. Joints seem to function
reasonably smoothly. On opening, he does deviate 2 to 3 mm to the left
side. Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm. Excursive movements to the right
are 10 mm and to the left 11 mm.

Intranasally, the luminal valves look somewhat constricted.

Radiographic Evaluation

The left condyle looks extremely long in the head and neck area as
compared to the right side. Missing maxillary right second and third
molar, left second bicuspid, first, second, and third molar, and
bilateral mandibular second and third molars. The rest of the teeth are
present. Sinuses appears clear. The left nasal airway appears somewhat
obstructed compared to the right side. Left condylar head and neck area
appear larger in dimension than the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Left nasal
airway appears fairly well blocked off. Right side appears to have some
space particularly around the middle turbinates.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears small anteroposteriorly
and is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Some increased anterior
joint space. Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa
but increased posterior joint space compared to the opposite side.
Condyle possibly could have been postured forward on this as on the
second tomogram cut it was postured forward about 4 mm in the fossa
area.

On opening, there is decreased translations of both TMJs.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class II jaw
relationship. There is a significant anterior open bite with increased
angulation of the upper arch. All of the missing posterior teeth are
readily observed. Upper incisors appear slightly overangulated as do the
mandibular incisors. Paul has a tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s
difference of only about 1 mm. Has an extremely accentuated curve of
occlusion in the upper arch with the four incisors being significantly
elevated compared to the rest of the posterior teeth. There is a reverse
curve of occlusion in the lower arch with the lower anterior teeth being
significantly lower than the posterior teeth probably by 2 mm difference
in the lower arch and probably 4 to 5 mm of accentuated curve of
occlusion in the upper arch.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with
    reduction

2.  Slight AP maxillary deficiency

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

4.  AP mandibular deficiency

5.  High occlusal plane angle

6.  Slight Class II cuspid relationship

7.  Anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm

8.  Right posterior crossbites

9.  Accentuated curve of Spee, upper arch

10. Slight reverse curve of Spee, lower arch

11. Slight tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 1+ mm

12. Mild crowding, lower anterior arch

13. Maxillary lateral incisor roots in distal angulation

14. Missing maxillary left second bicuspid, first, second, and third
    molar, maxillary right second and third molar and bilateral
    mandibular second and third molars

15. Right maxillary alveolar ridge atrophy

16. Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

1.  Surgery, Stage I

    A.  Bone graft to left maxillary sinus

    B.  Placement of osseointegrated implants when convenient

2.  Presurgical orthodontics


  Segment 1: Left cuspid/first bicuspid

  Segment 2: Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor

  Segment 3: Right cuspid through first molar

  Place a compensating step in the arch wire to align the four incisors
  in an elevated plane level as compared to the cuspids and bicuspids.
  Importantly, tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots
  distally to make room for interdental osteotomies

B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing
    a millimeter to 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the
    tooth-size discrepancy

3.  Surgery, Stage II

    A.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, downgraft it
        posteriorly, and eliminate the accentuated curve of Spee

    C.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction

    D.  Augmentation genioplasty with HTR implant

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

5.  Restorative dentistry to finalize the occlusion
