KRYSTLE LYNN 01/24/2008

Krystle is 24 years old and is referred by Dr. Hilton Goldriech, 3105
Legacy Dr., Ste. A, Plano, TX 75023. She has had problems with her
thyroid. Krystle does have some elevated liver enzymes that are being
evaluated. She has had a number of surgeries including tonsils and
adenoids, ear surgery at least 10 to 12 times, myringotomy and tubes and
some sinus surgery. She had to have some grafting in her ears to close
over the tympanic perforations. She has had some trauma to her nose and
has had some nasal surgery on it externally and internally as well. She
also had some chin surgery where the chin has been advanced and also
apparently there is an implant in the chin as well. She has apparently
had some cartilage grafting to the nose. She also has had Lasik surgery.


1.  Focalin XR 50 mg one per day.

2.  Tapazole 20 mg two at night.

3.  Nasonex two times a day.

4.  Vitamins and minerals and other dietary supplements.


1.  Difficulties breathing through the nose.

2.  Tongue thrust.

3.  Speech problems.

4.  Produces too much saliva.

5.  Biting difficulties.

6.  Narrow arches transversely.

7.  Anterior open bite.

In frontal view, Krystle has fairly good balance in the upper and upper
third face. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip
relationship is about –1. Maxillary midline is shifted a little bit off
to the left side as is the mandibular dental midline by at least about 1
mm and the chin is off to the left about 1 to 2 mm. The nasal tip is off
to the right side 1 to 2 mm. The upper lip appears to be retruded maybe
about 1 mm and chin maybe back about 8 to 10 mm. Intraorally, she has
all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth
appear somewhat small in size. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower
anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower
anterior arch. There is lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being
about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, Krystle has
all of her upper teeth back through the second molars present. In the
upper arch the left cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right
cuspid. She has a slight Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the
right side by about 2 mm but the left side appears closer to a Class I.
The maxillary left cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side
being about 2 mm higher than the right side. The left eye is about 2 mm
higher than the right eye. The lateral canthal on the left eye is a
little bit inferiorly positioned compared to the opposite side.
Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Transverse widths of the
arches appear somewhat narrow. Intranasally, the turbinates appear
moderate in size. She has some good stricture of the nostrils. On the
right side the septal cartilage is deviated a little bit off to the
right side. There is some significant narrowing of the luminal valve.

KRYSTLE LYNN 01/24/2008 Page 2

On the left side it is to a lesser extent. Krystle's first nasal surgery
was done by Dr. Rod Rorich and the chin was built up by Dr. Craig Hobar.
The second nasal work which took about 7 hours was performed by Dr. Jack
Gunter and the second chin implant was done by Dr. Fearon. To palpation,
she has no tenderness to the temporalis area but a little bit over the
masseter particularly on the right side. It appears that there may be
some kind of foreign material implanted into angle of the mandible on
the right side. To palpation she has some mild tenderness over the right
masseter and right TMJ area. On opening, she has an occasional loud
audible pop that occurred somewhere around 35 mm but is not consistent.
Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm. Excursive movement is about 7 mm in
each direction.


Panorex evaluation shows that she has a 3 x 3 lower retainer. All four
third molars are absent. Her sinuses look reasonably clear. She has had
some chin surgery done, as there is a bone plate present and also an
implant by history. It appears that there may have been some implants
placed at the angles of the mandible particularly on the right side and
maybe to a smaller degree on the left side but difficult to tell. The
left condyle appears quite arthritic and appears to have lost some
condylar volume. It is quite a bit shorter vertically as compared to the
opposite side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear fairly clear although the
right one is a little bit cloudy. The septum is fairly straight. There
are some pins in the septum likely to help keep it centered. Turbinates
may be somewhat large posteriorly. Maxillary and mandibular arches are
narrow transversely.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small in size and appears
arthritic. Joint space looks fairy good, however. Articular eminence is
relatively shallow.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured forward in the fossa
so she may not have been in centric relation. Articular eminence is
relatively shallow. There is some kind of metal object in the right
ramus area. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both
condyles. The left eminence is quite a bit more flat as compared to the
opposite side. On the x-ray she may have been posturing her mandible
forward. In remanipulating her mandible she has a little bit more end-on
Class II occlusion bilaterally.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some maxillary and
AP mandibular deficiency. Class II skeletal and Class II end-on occlusal
relationship. She has a metal pin through her maxilla that extends up
into the nose. There is some kind of implant at point A and subnasale
bone position. There is a bone plate in the chin. The chin was advanced
probably about 4 mm. There was a low chin advancement. The implant
probably is Silastic and is sitting above the chin area somewhat.
Occlusal plane is moderately high. Her oropharyngeal airway at the soft
palate level measures about 6 mm but at the base of the tongue it
measures about 2 mm. Krystle has only one kidney. Also, she never had
periods except when she was placed on birth control pills. They were not
even regular during that time. She currently is off birth control pills
as they are evaluating her liver and she does not have periods
currently. Bolton's analysis shows that there is a tooth size
discrepancy of almost 5 mm.

KRYSTLE LYNN 01/24/2008 Page 3


1.  Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with
    occasional reduction.

2.  Right TMJ possible disc location.

3.  AP mandibular deficiency.

4.  AP maxillary deficiency.

5.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

6.  Transverse deficiency of both maxilla and mandible.

7.  Maxillary arch asymmetry and mandibular arch asymmetry with the left
    cuspid being 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.

8.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm
    higher than the right side.

9.  Wide nasal dorsum.

10. Nasal tip deviated to the right 2 mm.

11. Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia.

12. Wide chin secondary to previously placed chin implant.

13. Obstruction of right nares secondary to septal cartilage shifted
    towards the right and

  luminal valve constricture.

14. Class II end-on occlusion.

15. Maxillary midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the left at the mandibular
    dental midline and

facial midline.

16. Significant tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4
    to 5 mm.

17. Moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.

18. Slightly reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.

19. Anterior open bite.

20. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of
    2 to 3 mm (normal 11 mm.)

21. Moderately high occlusal plane.

22. Previously placed implant in right mandibular ramus.


1.  MRI of left and right TMJs.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Consider expanding the lower
        arch if possible 4 to 5 mm in the first molar area. If it is
        difficult to do this, it can be done surgically.

    c.  Open spacing around the upper anterior teeth if possible.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ surgery (depending on MRI findings.)

    b.  Bilateral ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand and rotate in a
        counterclockwise direction.

KRYSTLE LYNN 01/24/2008 Page 4

d.  Remove previously placed chin implant.

e.  Consider placement of bilateral infraorbital implants.

f.  Nasal reconstruction to narrow the dorsum, straighten, and open the
    right nares.

g.  Consider partial turbinectomies if indicated to improve function of
    nasal airway.

h.  Consider removal of implant of right mandibular ramus area.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Restorative dentistry to buildup the teeth including possible
    anterior Veneers particularly on the upper arch.
