EMILIE SCHERNIK 01-29-03

Emilie is 14 years old and referred by Dr. George Adams, 3115 W. Parker
Road, #538, Plano, TX.

Patient History

Emilie does have major allergy and sinus problems and suffers from sinus
problems almost everyday. She previously had been diagnosed with asthma,
but it turned out it was more of a vocal cord disorder that she took
speech therapy for, and now she only has an asthma problem maybe once a
year. The only surgery she has had is tubes in her ears as an infant.
She is aware of a seizure problem as an infant. She had seizures up to
about the age of 7, and the seizures occurred only once or twice a year
and were relatively mild. She has had no seizure problems for about the
last 8 years.

She reports no problems with earaches or vertigo but does get occasional
tinnitus. No other joints bother her except her knees on occasion. She
has allergies to airborne environmental stuff, and she is also aware of
having reactions to cantaloupe, pecans, and bananas. She has no known
allergies to jewelry. She is not aware of nocturnal clenching or
bruxism.

Her jaw problems in reference to pain and headaches began about one to
she has had to date relative to her jaws is she had a maxillary expander
in the sixth grade for about a year, and then she had a retainer placed
in the lower arch that was recently removed. She gets headaches about
every other day that she rates at a level of 4 in the frontal, temporal,
and occasional in the posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 9.
On an average day, her pain is sort of a constant at 4 but can escalate
quite a bit higher than that. She rates her jaw function and diet at 4
and disability at 3.

Current Medications

1.  Singulair 10 mg q.d.

2.  Rhinocort 2 to 4 sprays each nostril

3.  Zyrtec 10 mg q.d.

4.  Proventil HA

5.  Maxair autohaler

6.  Foradil IP (rarely)

7.  Sudafed 2 to 4 times per day as needed

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Emilie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Nose is a little bit broad at the tip. Alar bases appear a little bit
wide. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Not much tubercle in the midline.
Upper teeth are probably 3 mm above the lip line. Maxillary midline is
about a millimeter off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is fairly
close to being on the facial midline, although the apices of the teeth
are shifted off a little bit toward the left. Chin is just slightly off
to the left side a couple of millimeters.

In profile view, with the teeth are apart about 3 mm, she does exhibit
some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm. Mandible is
actually in fairly good AP balance with just a slight strong prominence
to the chin. When Emilie closes into centric occlusion, she is severely
overclosed vertically and has probably about a 20 degree nasolabial
angle. She has a little bit of a saddle-shaped prominence or deficiency
in the nose in the nasofrontal area.

In the lower arch, she has all of her lower teeth back through the
second molars present, although the second molars are not completely
erupted in yet. She has a slightly accentuated curve of occlusion in the
lower arch. No particular crowding present. Has thin attached gingiva
around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has her permanent
teeth back through the first molars erupted in. Second molar is not
erupted in yet. Cuspids are blocked out of the arch, and lateral
incisors are somewhat lingually inclined. A little bit of space between
the upper anterior teeth. In her centric relation, she has bilateral
posterior open bites. She has perhaps just a slight Class II cuspid
relationship on the right side and more toward a Class I on the left
side. In her centric relation, she shifts to a Class III cuspid end-on
relationship bilaterally of about 3 to 4 mm. She has an anterior
crossbite, but posterior crossbites have been corrected with the
previous maxillary expansion. So in CR, she is basically a Class I
cuspid with an anterior crossbite and bilateral posterior open bites. In
CO, she is Class III occlusion by 3 to 4 mm anterior crossbite and 6 mm
reversed deep bite. She does have a transverse cant in the occlusal
plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.
Oropharynx appears clear. Posterior faucial pillars appear to be
somewhat posteriorly positioned. Uvula is of moderate size. She also has
some significant snoring problems that are there constantly. She does
have apneic episodes as observed by her mother. Emilie does state that
she feels tired a lot during the day. Mother states, however, she stays
up late doing her homework, which could play some role in that
condition.

Intranasally, the septum appears reasonably straight. Turbinates appear
moderately enlarged. Base of the columella is somewhat wide. Opening up
the nostrils enabled her to breathe a little bit better through her nose
but didn’t make any resounding difference for her. Columella base is
somewhat wide but may not be obstructive.

To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the temporalis,
styloid areas, left SCM, left medial pterygoid area, and a little lesser
discomfort over the masseter muscles. She has a glitch in the left TMJ
at about 35 m of opening. Right side seemed to function reasonably
smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that she has long condylar heads and necks. Lower second
molars are erupting in. Lower third molars are absent. Upper second
molars are unerupted, and upper third molars are quite high and
developing. Septum has a little bit of curvature to it. Turbinates are
moderately enlarged. Appears to have a fluid level in the right
maxillary sinus. In the left sinus, it appears there might be something
in the sinus cavity itself. Short vertical dimension between the
infraorbital rims and the maxillary teeth. Joints looks reasonably good.
Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch. Decreased
vertical height of the mandible back in the molar area.

Waters view shows that the superior part of the maxillary sinuses appear
relatively clear as do the frontals and ethmoids. Inferior part of the
sinuses are a little bit more difficult to see. Could be some thickening
of the mucosa in the right sinus. Septum appears a little bit more
deviated in this view, and turbinates appear a little bit larger
particularly on the right side. Difference in vertical height of the
mandible is seen with the left side being a little bit shorter than the
right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Superior
joint space and posterior joint spaces are present. Discs may be thin or
maybe could be possibly medially displaced. Articular eminence is
relatively shallow particularly for Emilie’s facial morphological type.

Left TMJ tomogram show fairly good condylar morphology, although there
is a little bit of beaking anteriorly. Articular eminence is relatively
shallow. Joint space appears similar to the opposite side.

Open views show that the condyles do hyperextend anterior to the
articular eminences.

Cephalometric radiograph is taken with the teeth open a little bit, and
there is about a 2-mm overbite anteriorly. This demonstrates posterior
open bites. Maxilla is deficient vertically and anteroposteriorly.
Position of the mandible doesn’t look too bad. She has increased soft
tissue thickness in the chin area as compared to the thickness of the
lips. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is only about 3 to
3.5 mm. At the base of the tongue, it measures about 9 mm. Forehead
area, the skull is prominent, and there is some depression in the
nasofrontal area.

Patient Concerns

1.  Headaches

2.  TMJ pain and discomfort

3.  Pain through the muscles of the head, face, neck area, and shoulders

4.  Difficulties eating and chewing

5.  Difficulties breathing through the nose

6.  Chronic sinus problems

7.  Snoring

8.  Tiredness during the day

9.  Difficulties sometimes catching her breath while she is sleeping

Basic Diagnoses

1.  AP maxillary deficiency

2.  Vertical maxillary deficiency

3.  Mandibular prognathism

4.  Bilateral posterior open bites in CR

5.  Anterior crossbite

6.  Class III end-on occlusion

7.  Transverse cant of the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm
    higher than the right side

8.  Severe crowding, upper anterior arch

9.  Hypertrophied turbinates

10. Nasal airway obstruction

11. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations (correlate
    this to MRI findings)

12. Overangulation of maxillary incisors

13. Low occlusal plane angulation

14. Hypertrophy of soft palate and uvula

15. Severe decrease of oropharyngeal airway

16. Severe snoring

17. Sleep apnea symptoms including apneic episodes as well as daytime
    somnolence

18. External nasal deformity

19. Headaches

20. Severe TMJ pain

21. Myofascial pain

22. Impacted maxillary third molars x 2

23. Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 3 mm plus
    maxillary incisors are excessively wide labiolingually

Recommended Treatment

1.  Extract maxillary second bicuspids or first bicuspids depending on
    Dr. Adams’ desires

2.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Create at least 1.5 mm of
        spacing around each upper lateral incisor. Try not to retract
        the maxillary central incisors much as their slight increased
        angulation that is present now will decrease as the occlusal
        plane is increased with the double-jaw surgery. Encourage
        eruption of maxillary second molars

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Encourage eruption of
        mandibular second molars

3.  Surgery

    A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, downgraft
        it anteriorly, increase occlusal plane angle, and correct any
        transverse width discrepancies that may be present

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to clockwise rotate the
        posterior aspect of the mandible superiorly

    C.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        (depending on MRI findings)

    D.  Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars

    E.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies

    F.  External nasal reconstruction with grafting

    G.  Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP)

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
