AMANDA HOFF									12/15/2005


PRIMARY CONCERNS
    1. Slipped disc in her jaw joints.
    2. Popping in the jaw joints but not as often as previous.
    3. Severe jaw pain particularly with jaw function.
    4. Headaches.
    5. Pain in the jaw joints. 
    6. Difficulties eating and chewing.
    7. Changing of her bite.

She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus.  She gets occasional vertigo but no hearing loss. No other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She gets headaches about three times per week and they occur predominately in the temporal area and perhaps a little bit in the frontal area.  She registers that at a level of 4.  She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, disability at 5.  In frontal view, Amanda has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is a little bit off to the right side about 1 mm.  Chin is probably about 3 mm off to the right side.  

In profile view she has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip.  She has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  Chin appears a little bit retruded.  She has a head postured forward neck position.  Chin is retruded by probably about 12 to 15 mm.  Chin-neckline is a little bit short.  Chin neck angle is reasonably well defined.  As she postures her lower jaw forward, it does improve her overall facial balance.  Intraorally, she has a Class II end-on occlusion on the right side and on the left side by probably a couple of mm.  Intraorally, she does have all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has 1 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Teeth are fairly well aligned and level.  She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.  In the upper arch, Amanda has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.  She can slide easily to a fairly good Class I cuspid molar relationship.  She has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being probably a mm higher than the left side.  Oropharynx appears clear.  It could be a little elongated but not too significant.  The uvula looks relatively normal in size.  The faucial pillars look relatively normal.  Tonsils look normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate to severe in size.  She has some airway obstruction.  Amanda reports that she is predominately a mouth breather day and night.  The septum does bend a little bit but probably within normal limits.  She probably has at least moderate nasal airway obstruction.  

AMANDA HOFF				12/15/2005				Page 2


The columella and nostrils appear relatively normal as do the luminal valves.  In frontal view she does have a little bit of deficiency in the projection of the left cheek area but this in part is probably due to the parotidectomy done on that side.

RADIOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS
She has four third molars present.  Three of them are erupted or at least partially erupted in the right maxillary and the third molar may still be soft tissue impacted.  The condyle looks small and looks flattened on top.  Difficult to evaluate the sinuses or the nasal airway.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The nasal septum appears to have quite a bit of deviation particularly back at the bony areas and may have some spurring.  The turbinates appear quite large and the nasal airway appears fairly obliterated.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic and appears to have lost some volume.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The joint space superiorly and posteriorly appears decreased in size.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  There is some flattening in the superior head is noted.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  On opening, there is restricted translation. 

Cephalometric analysis shows that she may not have been completely in centric relation but she has a skeletal Class II, close to a skeletal Class I occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted at the soft palate level.  The airway measures about 5 mm and the base of the tongue measures 6 mm.  There is a slightly high occlusal plane angle.  Lower incisors are slightly overangulated.  In manipulating the models, she fits into a pretty good Class I occlusal and skeletal position.  Maximal incisal opening is about 29 mm, opening without any significant pain or discomfort 19 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 3 mm.

Amanda was in an auto accident before her jaw problems began where she was involved in a head-on accident but she does not believe that she hit her jaw at all but she did have some neck and back problems after that for a couple of weeks but then that cleared up as well.  They estimate the speed was somewhere around 50 miles an hour.  She also was in an accident about 2 years prior to that in another head-on accident where the speed was lower than 40 miles an hour and that nobody went to the hospital or emergency room following that accident.  After the first one described above, she did go and have x-rays done.  There were no findings.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
    1. Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption with articular disc dislocations and without reduction. 
    2. AP mandibular deficiency and asymmetry. 
    3. AP maxillary deficiency and asymmetry as well as posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
AMANDA HOFF				12/15/2005				Page 3


    4. Slight Class II end-on occlusion.  
    5. High occlusal plane angulation. 
    6. Transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being approximately 2 mm higher than the left side.
    7. Severe TMJ pain.
    8. Headaches.
    9. Myofascial pain. 
    10. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
    11. Hypertrophied turbinates.
    12. Nasal airway obstruction.
    13. Malaligned partially impacted third molars x4.

    1. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.
    2. Surgery.
        a. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
        b. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, level transversely and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
        c. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction and level transversely.  
        d. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
        e. Surgical removal of third molars times 4.
    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

