HEATHER RANSOM Telephone Conversation 06-03-03

Heather is 24 years old.

Patient History

Her TMJ problems began in about 1982 or 1983, and I had previously seen
her in 1995. I had diagnosed her with ICR. In about 1993 or 1994, she
underwent double-jaw orthognathic surgery and a genioplasty by Dr.
Gerald Hansen in Los Vegas, Nevada. Problems were encountered during
surgery, and he had difficulty the maxilla and the fact that it became
avascular when he tried to reposition it superiorly. She was referred to
me for evaluation, and it was at that time that I identified the ICR and
apparently reworked a plan but it was never completed. In January of
1998, Heather was hit head-on by a drunk driver, and she hit the side of
her head and was in a coma for four days. She is not really sure if that
worsened her TMJ problems or not because she has had headaches since
that time. The headaches are predominantly in the temporal areas
bilaterally and go to the back of the head. It is quite probable that
these headaches may be related to joint problems that were exacerbated
by the auto accident. She takes Excedrin and Advil for her headaches.
She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.
She gets headaches three to four times per week at a level of 7, and
they occur in the temporal and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ
pain at 3 and overall pain on an average day at about a level of 5, jaw
function at 2, diet at 3, and disability at 0. To palpation, she has
tenderness over her TMJs but no tenderness over the temporalis or
masseter muscles. She does have some pain and discomfort in her neck.
Other joints that bother her include her thumbs, which she feels is
related to chronic popping of her finger joints, and she has problems
with her knees and ankles. She has an allergy to PENICILLIN and does
have difficulties wearing cheap earrings. She snores even though she
sleeps on her side. She is tired in the mornings, and it is usually
until noon that she really wakes up and gets over some of her tiredness.

Patient Concerns

1.  Headaches

2.  TMJ pain

3.  Teeth and jaws don’t fit together

4.  Difficulties breathing through the nose

5.  Snoring

6.  Daytime tiredness

Basic Diagnoses

Based on photographs, models, lateral cephalometric radiograph, MRI, and

1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with
    questionable salvageability

2.  AP mandibular hypoplasia

3.  Vertical mandibular excess

4.  AP maxillary deficiency

5.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

6.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess

7.  Class II end-on occlusion

8.  Anterior open bite tendency

9.  Missing four first bicuspids

10. Mild crowding in upper arch

11. Mild crowding in lower arch

12. Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 1 to 1.5 mm

13. Headaches

14. TMJ pain

15. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway

16. Hypertrophied turbinates

17. Nasal airway obstruction

18. Snoring

19. Sleep apnea symptoms

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially
    and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies

B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth to
    remove about a millimeter to 1.5 mm of tooth structure to correct
    for the tooth-size discrepancy
