LILI SMITH 11/19/2008

Lili is 14 years old. Referred by Dr. William Schmohl. Lili was born
with Apert’s syndrome. In 1994, she had cranial surgery to release the
cranial sutures. Later on that same year, she had an additional surgery
to release the lambdoids. In 1997, she had her adenoids removed. In
2003, she mid-face and forehead advancement. In 2004, she had her
tonsils removed. Up until 2003, Lili had severe sleep apnea problems and
was actually on a BiPAP machine. Following the mid face advancement and
the subsequent tonsillectomy, Lili is pretty free of the sleep apnea
problems. She breathes unassisted and is doing very well from that
standpoint. Lili has no TMJ problems or TMJ symptoms. She takes Accutane
and that is the only medication. She still has some mild snoring. She
has to sleep on her side. If she tries to sleep on her back, her has
breathing difficulties. She breathes through her mouth at night when she
is sleeping.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Lili has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. The intercanthal distance is about 45 mm.
The papillary distance is almost 70 mm. The nose is deviated off towards
the left side than back closer on to the midline. Upper tooth lip
relationship is about -4 mm. In profile view, Lili has AP maxillary
deficiency and some AP mandibular deficiency as well. Intraorally, Lili
is missing the mandibular first bicuspids. She has residual space on the
right side between the cuspid and the second bicuspid. She appears to
have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.
Mandibular left cuspid is 1 or 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid. In
the upper arch, she is missing some permanent teeth, perhaps the
maxillary left central incisor, and she has a significantly deformed
maxillary right central incisor. It appears that she is missing the
maxillary right cuspid and on the left side the cuspid and lateral
incisor are transpositioned. She appears to be missing a bicuspid on
each side, but has the first and second molars present. She has a
massive amount of soft tissue in the palatal area. Oropharyngeal tissues
looks healthy, but the uvula is extremely small and the soft palate is
moderately short in AP length. Facial pillars appear to constrict
relatively normally. Tonsils are absent. Intranasally, the septum is
deviated far off towards to the left side and, in fact, displaces the
nose towards the left side. It obstructs intranasally in just putting
the nasal scope in. Turbinates appears to be relatively normal in size,
but can only see anteriorly and the left nasal airway is blocked off
mainly because of the septum. There is a spur off the right side of the
septum that appears to be blocking some of the airway on the right side.
Apparently, following the mid facial surgery, the nasal dorsum was
fairly straight, but has significantly shifted since that time. Joints
function smoothly. Lili is essentially a full Class III occlusal
relationship. She has an anterior open bite of probably about 2 mm and a
reverse overjet of about close to 8 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of four impacted
third molars. The condyles appear to be postured forward in the fossa.
She has bone plates in the maxillary and zygoma area. She has an
anterior open bite.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow
anteroposteriorly, but there appears to be reasonable joint space.
Articular eminence is relatively normal in inclination.

Right TMJ was essentially missed in the tomogram. It is very difficult
to identify the right joint. There appears to be reasonably good
translation of both joints.

Waters view shows a severe deviation of the bony nasal septum. The
turbinates appear moderate in size. It appears that there is some
significant nasal airway obstruction. Sinuses were quite small in the
maxilla. She has bone plates in the temporal areas, nasal frontal area,
zygoma, and maxillary areas.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has AP maxillary
deficiency. It appears that she has decreased oropharyngeal airway at
the base of the tongue where it measures about 7 mm and at the soft
palate level which measures about 6 mm.


1.  Apert’s syndrome.

2.  AP maxillary vertical hypoplasia.

3.  Mandibular prognathism.

4.  Hypertelorism.

5.  Telecanthism.

6.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

7.  Deviated nasal septum.

8.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

9.  Nasal airway obstruction.

10. Impacted 3^(rd) molars x4.

11. Decrease oropharyngeal airway dimension.

12. Severe hyperplastic tissue on the palate.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue aligning and leveling the maxillary arch.

    b.  Continue aligning and leveling the mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Maxillary osteotomies to bring the maxilla forward in a
          counterclockwise direction so that the incisor tip is advanced
          about 8 to 9 mm and at the osteotomy site only about 3 mm.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in
          a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

    d.  Nasal septoplasty to create a functional nasal airway.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

4.  Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the maxillary occlusion.

5.  Cranial facial surgery to correct hypertelorism and telecanthism.

6.  External nasal reconstruction.

7.  Reduction of hyperplastic palatal tissue to create more room for the
    tongue.
