B243
B243 is 47 years old, referred by Dr. _____. Previous surgeries include a tonsillectomy 41 years ago, D&C 18 and 17 years ago and as well as uterus surgery 17 years ago and a hysterectomy 21 years ago. She had her gallbladder removed 4 years ago. In addition, B243 has thyroid problems and also an anxiety disorder.

Headaches.
TMJ pain.
Muscle and jaw pain.
Nighttime clenching and bruxism that creates significant pain.
Difficulties eating and chewing.
Significant noises in the jaw joints.

Paxil.
Synthroid.
Depo Estrogen 1.5 cc biweekly.
Xanax 5 mg p.r.n. Flexeril p.r.n. Hydrocodone 7.5 mg p.r.n. as needed at night.
She has had some reaction in the past to some pain medications, penicillin, erythromycin, and sulfa antibiotics.


She wakes up at night frequently with pain. She has a significant amount of clenching and bruxism at night and also during the day clenches significantly. She gets headaches almost on a daily basis at a level of 7 that occur predominately in the frontal area behind the eyes and in the temple area. She rates her TMJ pain at 9 particularly when she wakes up at night and in the morning. Average daily pain is around a level 5. She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 4. B243 does say that her husband thinks that she is talking a lot louder now particularly when she is on the phone as compared to when she did a year or two ago indicative of perhaps some hearing changes.

B243
Primary snoring but few apneas were hypopneas. Restless leg syndrome. Inadequate sleep hygiene. Sleep bruxism. Sleep talking. She had 2.15 apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep. She had less than 1 dozen oxygen desaturations.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
: Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the teeth are present. Braces are on through the second molars on the right side and first molars on the left side. Joints look arthritic with the right side being worse than the left side. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Waters view show that the sinuses are clear. Right turbinate appears quite large. The nasal septum is deviated off to the left side particularly back in the bony area.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

B243 Page 3
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic and there is a decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints but the condyle is not coming down to the eminence area.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible appear AP retruded. Lower incisors are significantly overangulated. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level looks to be around 3 to 4 mm and at the base of the tongue approximately 5 mm. She has a relatively low occlusal plane angle. Chin is fairly prominent. There is a tooth size discrepancy with a 's difference of about 2 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with perforations.
AP maxillary deficiency.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II occlusion. Overangulation of lower incisors.
Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway approximately 4 mm (normal 11 mm.)
Hyperplastic soft palate. Hyperplastic uvula.
TMJ pain.
Headaches.
Myofascial pain.
Severe snoring.
Sleep apnea symptoms. Hypertrophied right nasal turbinate.
Partial nasal airway obstruction.
AP macrogenia.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT: Medications.
a. Klonopin 1 mg tablet 1 tablet q.h.s. to help eliminate clenching. 2. Presurgical orthodontics. a. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies in case they are needed. Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure but remove more tooth structure on the right side compared to the left because the right incisors are larger than the left ones. Also, close the space in the mandibular left cuspid lateral incisor area. Consider slenderizing lower bicuspids removing about 1/2 mm of tooth structure from each of those teeth and retract. This will correct the tooth size discrepancy as well as decrease the over angulation of the lower incisors.

B243 Page 4
3. CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.) 4. Surgery. a. Bilateral mandibular reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward.
Bilateral coronoidectomy.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Right nasal turbinectomy.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP)
Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to decrease prominence of the chin. 5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B243 MRI Evaluation 
This is a poor quality MRI.
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have significant arthritis. There is a lot of erosion on the head of the condyle. There may be some artifact present. There may be bone-on-bone contact. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a fair amount in one view probably 3 to 4 mm. In another view it appears that the lateral aspect of the condyle extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that likely has had some previous surgery. There appears to be significant arthritis in this joint. Lateral pole of the condyle extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Moderate downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some significant arthritic changes. Bone looks a little bit rough at the lateral aspect with some osteophytic formation. There may be a little bit of degenerative changes in the fossa as well but difficult to tell. Towards the middle part of the joint, the condyle is quite flattened posteriorly and there is some anterior beaking and a little sclerosis on the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced. Disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence. Disc appears degenerated. On open view, there is fairly minimal translation of the condyle. The disc remains anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence area. The disc may be adhesed to the eminence. The condyle looks quite arthritic in the open view. Articular eminence appears quite steep in the open view.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is arthritic. Towards the medial aspect it is quite narrow anteroposterior. At the lateral aspect it appears wider. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The posterior head of the condyle is quite flattened. Anterior beaking is present. Decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint there is a large erosive area on the anterior aspect of the condyle. The disc is anteriorly displaced and very difficult to identify but may be sitting around the apex of the articular eminence. The disc appears significantly deformed. On open view, there is restricted translation of the condyle also on this side. The disc sits beneath the articular eminence with very little translatory movement and may be adhesed to the articular eminence. The articular eminence on this side does not appear to be quite as steep as the opposite side. Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, however, it is difficult to identify the articular eminence in some of the views indicative of perhaps some significant degenerative changes on the articular eminence.

IMPRESSION: Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with likely adhesions to the articular eminence and severe deformation. Highly questionable salvageability of the articular disc.
May be candidate for total joint prosthesis but will be dependent on clinical and radiographic assessment.

