B333 
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints. Pain in the jaws.

B333 is unsure of when his jaw joints began clicking and popping. However, during the past year, his joints have become quite symptomatic. He has been in splint therapy for bruxism for the past 5 years. He takes occasional Advil or Tylenol when his pain gets more significant. B333 rates his TMJ pain which is fairly constant at about a level of 5, average daily pain at 4, average headaches at about 2 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally. He rates his jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 2. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo and no other joints bother him. He is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time. B333 did have previous orthodontics from the age of 12 to 14.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B333 has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 mm off to the right side. Nasal tip is off to the left side about 2 mm. Chin is off to the right side about 4 mm. In profile view, B333 has some significant AP maxillary deficiency of probably a good 6 mm. Upper lip supra-labrale is probably almost 4 mm posterior to subnasale. Mandible is retruded. Chin is fairly prominent compared to the AP position in the lower lip. Chin neckline is not well defined. Chin is probably posteriorly positioned about 8 mm. B333 is missing the lower first bicuspids. He has a lot of wear on his posterior teeth. The lower incisors appear to be in a little bit of lingual inclination. Transverse with the lower arch is fairly constricted. In the upper arch, B333 is missing the upper first bicuspids as well as. These teeth were extracted for previous orthodontics. He has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side by 2 mm and on the left side he has just a slight Class III cuspid relationship by 1-2 mm. He has about 0.5 mm of vertical overbite. He has relatively small upper lateral incisors. He may have just a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being down no more than 1 mm. Uvula is somewhat elongated. The soft palate and fascial pillars look normal. Tonsils are maybe moderately enlarged, a little bit more so on the left side than the right side. Intranasally, he has an enlarged turbinate on the left side. On the right side, it appears that posteriorly the septum deviates off towards the right side and appears it may touch against the turbinate. He has some mild snoring, but no sleep apnea symptoms apparently. B333 has had all four wisdom teeth removed. To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the styloid area, but no other tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, he has an audible click in the left joint at about 20 mm and a closing click at about 10. On the right side, he has a softer click at probably about 25 mm and a closing click that is a little bit more noticeable at 15 mm. As B333 opens his jaw, he has to shift his mandible off towards the right side, open some, and then go back towards the left in order to open completely. In excursion movements, B333 has an audible pop in the right TMJ and the left side is a little bit less noisy. Maximal size opening is 53 mm, opening without significant pain 40 mm. Excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis, but articular discs anteriorly and medially dislocated.
AP maxillary deficiency. AP mandibular dental alveolar hypoplasia. Macrogenia.
Slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side. Small upper lateral incisors.
Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 4.5 mm.
TMJ pain. Missing maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids that were removed previously for orthodontic reasons.

Two treatment options were presented to B333.
Presurgical orthodontics.
a. Place appliances on maxillary arch.
Place appliances on mandibular arch. Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain the occlusion, but allow the condyles to move downwards and forwards to make room for the articular discs.
Postsurgical orthodontics with consideration for opening bicuspid spaces and tipping the incisors forward as well as perhaps distalization of the posterior teeth to make room for the previously extracted first bicuspids. Restorative dentistry.
a. Placement of 4 dental osseus implants.

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch. Open about 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor but also open spacing for replacement of the first bicuspids. This may require distalization to a certain extent of the second bicuspids and molars. Open up spaces in the lower arch in the first bicuspid area to accommodate bicuspid replacement. The presurgical orthodontics will flare the upper and lower incisors forward.
Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward and increase the occlusal plane angle.
Maxillary osteotomies to down graft the anterior aspect approximately 2 mm and move the posterior aspect upwards 2 mm as well as advance the maxilla forward about 6-8 mm at the incisal edge.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry.
Placement of 4 osteointegrated implants. Place crowns on the 4 osteointegrated implants.

B333  MRI EVALUATION 
AGE: 37/M
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased lateral joint space. Disc appears to be medially displaced covering the medial two-thirds of the condyle with the lateral third uncovered. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. It appears there may be discal tissue in position. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2-3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view a condyle that has a little bit of sclerosis on the top, a little bit of flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of peaking of the condyle in the midportion. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc posterior band is not seen in the lateral aspect of the joint compatible with medial displacement. More medially, the disc appears to be in better position. A little bit of fluid in the superior joint space, but not too significant. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the disc appears to be in a reduced position.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with just a little bit of sclerosis on the top of it. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced in probably about the 9:30 position. There is some compressed tissue above the condyle. The disc is sitting beneath the articular eminence. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and disc and the disc is in a reduced position.

Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc medially displaced. Left TMJ arthritis with a thickened articular disc and forward posturing of the condyle in the fossa.
Right TMJ mild arthritis and anterior displacement of the articular disc with reduction.

Based on MRI, recommended treatment would be bilateral TMJ repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors

