B526
AGE: 49/F
B526 was referred by Dr. XXXX. B526 has had several previous surgical procedures. Twenty-three years ago, she had cheek implants, rhinoplasty, and a genioplasty performed. Three years ago, she had eyelid surgery as well as a chemical peel and another chin procedure. In addition, she had a face lift and a reduction in the nasal tip. Two years ago, she had maxillary and mandibular osteotomies, another chin procedure done, and cheek implants placed. The last two procedures were performed by Dr. XXXX. Last year, he performed additional surgery on her removing bone plates from the maxilla and recontouring some of the bone in that area. Her orthodontics have been performed by Dr. XXXX. She has recently transferred to Dr. XXXX. She also has been evaluated by Dr. XXXX.

Popping of left and right TMJs. Teeth do not fit together well.
The back teeth do not fit.
Difficulties eating and chewing. Roof of the mouth has changed.
She feels she does not have much space in the oral cavity.
Overbite. Upper lip is shorter in length than it used to be. Cheek bones are too big.
Lips curve downward at the side of the mouth.

She also does get tension in her neck and shoulder area. B526 has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her right elbow, she has bulging discs in her back, and her knees, fingers, and right hip bother her. She has problems with allergy and asthma and has postnasal drainage. She has had carpal tunnel surgery on both wrists and continues to have tension down her right arm. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and also clenching during the day. She has no problems with headaches and claims on TMJ pain on a daily basis. B526 rates his TMJ pain at 0, average daily pain at 4, jaw function, diet, and disability all at 6.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Maxair.
Advair. Xanax.
Mucinex.
Claritin.
Nasonex nasal spray.
Vivelle patch (hormone replacement).
Synthroid.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction. AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia.
Class I end-on cuspid relationship, super Class II molar relationship.
High occlusal plane angle.
Missing maxillary first bicuspids extracted previously for orthodontic treatment. Spaces in the lower first bicuspid area created to replace the missing lower first bicuspids. Excessively large cheek implants.
Tooth size discrepancy created by the wide labiolingual dimensions of the anterior six teeth.

Presurgical orthodontics. Continue to align and level the maxillary arch. Recontour the incisors by removing the marginal ridges and thin the incisal edges slightly.
Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. Hold lower first bicuspid spacing. Surgery. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward about 2 mm, down graft the posterior aspect approximately 4 to 5 mm to decrease occlusal plane angle and upright the incisors. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. Consider recontouring cheek implants to reduce prominence. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry
Placement of osteointegrated implants in the lower first bicuspid areas bilaterally. Placement of crowns on the dental implants.

B526 MRI
AGE: 49/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. There appears to be decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. There appears to be discal tissue medially displaced and covering probably just the medial third of the condyle. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a dominant coverage of bone of about 1 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width, but the medial pole is significantly lower than the lateral pole of the condyle. There is decreased superior joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc appears to be medially displaced and covers only the medial half of the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat with a dominant coverage of about 1mm or so.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology with a little bit of flattening anteriorly and just some slight anterior beaking, but not too significant. Articular eminence is fairly steep. The articular disc is anteriorly displaced. There is some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle and a little superior beaking towards the medial side of the joint. More medially, the disc is in little bit better position in the joint, thus, the appearance that the disc was medially displaced. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle with what appears to be an intermediate reduction of the disc, but the disc is in position on full opening.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology, but has some significant flattening on the anterior head and a little bit of anterior beaking towards the medial aspect of the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Laterally, the disc is absolutely anteriorly displaced, but towards the medial aspect the disc is in a better AP position. There is very minimal fluid in the superior joint space. On opening, there appears to be an early reduction on this side as compared to the opposite side, and there is reasonably good translation of both the condyle and the articular disc.

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction. Right TMJ moderate arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with early reduction.

