KRISTI PACE-KLICK								03/08/2006

Kristi is 39 years old and is referred by Dr. George Adams, Plano, Texas.  Kristi is in good health except for the jaw, neck and back problems she currently has.  

    1. Headaches.
    2. Jaw and muscle pain.
    3. Joint pain. 
    4. Speech affected. 
    5. Difficulties eating and chewing. 
    6. Biting lip and cheeks.
    7. Lower jaw occasionally getting shifted off towards the right side. 
    8. Difficulties breathing through the nose. 
    9. Teeth and jaws do not align properly. 

She takes Clarinex, Nasonex and Effexor on a regular basis.  She takes Flexeril p.r.n., valium p.r.n., Darvocet p.r.n., Advil p.r.n. and Ambien p.r.n. sleep.  She has had an adverse reaction to penicillin, Percodan and Percocet.  

Kristi has had some jaw concerns since her teenage years.  She has also had a Class III attitude in her jaw alignment.  About two years ago she started to have some increased occurrence in headaches.  However, on June 10, 2005, she was involved in an MVA where she was struck from behind when she was standing still.  She was hit at about 45 miles an hour.  She sustained herniated discs in both her neck and her back.  She sustained trauma to the jaws as well.  All of her previous symptoms became much more severe.  Since her injury, she has been wearing a nightguard and she wears an NTI.  She also takes physical therapy.  These treatments have not significantly helped her.  

She is very much aware of clenching her teeth at night and also probably during the day as well.  She wakes up with pain and headaches in the mornings but then that situation usually gets worse in the afternoons and evenings.  She gets almost daily headaches in the frontal, temple and sometimes on the top of the head at about a level of 7.  She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain and headaches at 6, jaw function at 6, diet at 7, disability at 5.  

In frontal view, she has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 to 3 mm.  Maxillary dental midline is a little bit off to the right side by about 1 mm.  Mandibular dental midline is about almost 2 mm off to the left.  Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with the chin being a couple of mm off to the left side as well.  In profile, Kristi has some slight deficiency in the maxilla probably about 3 to 4 mm.  The chin also appears somewhat AP deficient by probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Vertical facial balance is fairly good.  She does have a little bit of fullness in the submental area.  Chin-neckline is fairly well defined.  Intraorally, Kristi has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has crowns on her left posterior molars.  She has adequate attached gingiva on the lower anterior teeth.  Some lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  
KRISTI PACE-KLICK				03/08/2006				Page 2


In the upper arch Kristi has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  Kristi has almost a full Class III occlusion on the right side by probably 5 to 6 mm, in the left side she is fairly close to being a Class I.  Kristi has about a 1 mm anterior open bite present.  She has left posterior crossbite and right crossbite involving the first bicuspid and of course the anterior crossbite.  Kristi has a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the left side.  In the anterior posterior direction, the right cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  Kristi does state that she finds herself biting the insides of her cheeks a lot now to try to perhaps create some separation between her teeth so that she can be more comfortable.  Oropharynx is clear and tissues look healthy.  The uvula is moderately enlarged.  The soft palate looks relatively normal.  Faucial pillars appear normal.  Tonsils are present but appear relatively normal but may be just slightly enlarged.  Nasally, Kristi has a little mild wide columella and nostrils are a little bit narrow but intranasally the luminal valves are somewhat constricted.  The tonsils are moderately enlarged.  Kristi feels that she is pretty much a mouth breather day and night.  Kristi is aware that she has some moderate snoring.  She has some moderate tiredness during the day.  She is not aware of sleep apnea problems per se.  Kristi does state that she gets bronchitis and strep throat at least two to three times per year.  Kristi has a tooth size discrepancy of the anterior 6 teeth of 1.5 to 2 mm.  In the bicuspid area she has a tooth size discrepancy of about 1/2 mm affecting the maxillary second bicuspids.  To palpation she has some moderate tenderness over the TMJs and milder tenderness over the temporalis, masseters, styloid areas, SCMs and shoulder areas.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm with only about 5 mm with comfort.  Excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction.

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  All other teeth are present.  She has full crowns on the left first and second molars.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The condyles appear to look relatively clear.  The condyles appear to look relatively normal.  The styloid processes are a little bit prominent.

Waters view shows that she has what appears to be some mucocele or fluid of some type in her sinuses.  The septum is a little bit deviated off towards the left side in the bony area.  Turbinates are moderate size.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be in superior and posterior position in the fossa.  Articular eminence is relatively moderate in size.  There may be a little bit of flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.

Left TMJ tomogram shows some flattening on the head of the condyle.  Joint space looks a little bit better than the opposite side.  Articular eminence is with moderate inclination.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyles forward onto the articular eminences.  Some anterior beaking can be appreciated on the left condyle on the open view and a little flattening and a little sclerosis perhaps on the right side.  

KRISTI PACE-KLICK				03/08/2006				Page 3


Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class III type of occlusion.  The occlusal plane is moderately increased.  Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted posteriorly with an AP dimension of only about 5 mm between the soft palate and posterior pharyngeal wall area.  The base of the tongue is about 10 mm. 

    1. Left TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of articular disc.
    2. Right TMJ arthritis with anteromedial displacement of the articular disc.
    3. Mandibular deviated prognathism. 
    4. Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.
    5. Class II occlusion on the right side and Class I on the left.  
    6. Anterior and left posterior crossbites.
    7. TMJ pain.
    8. Headaches.
    9. Myofascial pain. 
    10. Chronic bilateral maxillary sinusitis. 
    11. Mandibular arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 2 to 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid and the maxillary right cuspid is 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid. 
    12. Maxillary midline shifted off to the right side 1 mm, mandibular dental midline shifted off to the left 2 mm.  
    13. Slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 2 mm lower than the left side.  

    1. Presurgical orthodontics. 
        a. Align and level maxillary arch. 
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 mm to 1.5 mm of tooth structure to help correct the tooth size problem.  Consider using Class II elastics on the left side, Class III on the right side to try and improve the arch asymmetry by advancing the mandibular left cuspid forward 1 to 2 mm and retracting the right side about 1 mm. 
    2. CT scan of sinuses and nasopharyngeal airway.
    3. Surgery.
        a. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
        b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and down graft it posteriorly. 
        c. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate it back on the facial midline and advance in a counterclockwise direction.
        d. Explore and debride maxillary sinuses.  
    4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

