B011
B011 is 26 years old.
Patient History

Clinical Examination
In frontal view, B011 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0. Maximally midline is pretty much on the facial middline, but mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the left side, although the chin is pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, B011 has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. <PERSON> appears retruded by probably close to a centimeter. Chin-neckline is somewhat short.

Intraorally, B011 has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Transverse width of the lower arch appears somewhat constricted. May have a slightly increased curve of Wilson involving the bicuspids and molars.

In the upper arch, B011 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has a reverse curve of Wilson involving the bicuspids and a little bit with the molars. B011 has a reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. She has a Class I occlusion on the left side, but a Class II end-on cuspid on the right side by probably 4 mm. She had an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm. Transverse width of the upper arch is somewhat constricted as well. Slight cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being about a millimeter higher than the right cuspid. Left mandibular cuspid is probably 2 mm anterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, the left cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid. <PERSON> appears clear. Uvula, soft palate, and faucial pillars look within normal limits.

Intranasally posteriorly the septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side, but the turbinates appear relatively normal in size, and there does not appear to be any significant airway obstruction.

To palpation, she has some moderate pain over the styloid areas and milder pain over the masseters, <PERSON>, and posterior neck areas. To palpation, the lateral poles of the condyles extend significantly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm but only 38 without developing significant pain problems. Excursive movement to the right is about 14 mm and to the left 12 mm. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly on opening, although I could feel the condyles coming out beyond the articular eminences. I cannot detect any clicking or popping related to disc position.

Radiographic Evaluation
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows good facial balance with probably a slight Class II skeletal relationship. Anterior deep bite exists of about 4 mm. Oropharyngeal airway looks good. Occlusal plane looks fairly low.

Panorex shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. The condyles both appear as though they may be a little bit flattened anteriorly, and articular eminences look steep bilaterally. Is missing the four third molars. Radiograph is not very good as there is a dark area covering about two thirds.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. <PERSON> is reasonably straight except it may bulge out posteriorly on the right side. Left turbinate is somewhat hyperplastic compared to the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows an articular eminence that is fairly steep and is almost at a right angle to the horizontal plane. Decreased superior and posterior joint space is present. <PERSON> demonstrates a little bit of peaking superiorly. Cortical bone looks fairly good around the head of the condyle.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has more of a hockey stick shape on this side. Condylar head appears to be tipped forward. Joint space looks good superiorly and posteriorly. Articular eminence is not as steep on this side as the opposite side. There appears to be hypertranslation of the condyles out of the fossa.

Patient Concerns
Headaches
Difficulty chewing some foods
Teeth and jaws are not aligned properly
Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations at the lateral aspect of the joints. Medially the discs are in more normal position
<LOCATION> steep articular eminences with vertical inclination of the articular discs at the lateral aspect
AP mandibular deficiency
Class II occlusion on the right side, basically a Class I on the left side
Mandibular dental midline shifted approximately 2 to 3 mm to the right of the maxillary midline
Accentuated curve of <PERSON>, mandibular posterior arch, involving the bicuspids and molars
Reverse curve of Wilson in the maxillary posterior arch involving the bicuspids and first molars
Transverse narrowness of maxillary and mandibular arch
Lower arch asymmetry with the mandibular right cuspid being about 2 or 3 mm posterior to the left cuspid
Upper arch asymmetry with the maxillary left cuspid being about a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid
Slight overangulation of lower anterior teeth
Myofascial pain
Headaches
Reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch
Anterior deep bite of 4 mm
Nocturnal clenching and bruxism

Recommended Treatment
Medication
Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to control clenching and bruxism
Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch. Expand the bicuspids and first molars slightly to correct the reverse curve of Wilson
Align and level mandibular arch. Upright molars and bicuspids to help correct the accentuated curve of Wilson. Strip lower anterior teeth removing no more than 2 mm of tooth structure and retract Consider the use of Class II elastics on the right side and Class III elastics on the left side to try to shift the dentition so that the mandibular dental midline will shift about 3 mm to the left back onto the facial midline. Try to establish good lower arch symmetry so that the cuspids are aligned across from each other in the lower arch

<LOCATION> injections with local anesthetic to see if this eliminates the headaches and myofascial pain problems. If so, then this may indicate that the intercapsular disc displacements at the lateral aspects of the joints may be contributory to her headache and pain problems

Surgery
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
<LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repairs if indicated from further evaluations

B011 MRI Scan Evaluation
Left <LOCATION>, coronal view, shows a condyle that appears quite wide in dimension. Moderate downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa of about 2 mm. Appears to be loss of cortical bone toward the medial side of the fossa. There is some type of material that appears to be discal in nature in the joint area. Some unevenness on the head of the condyle particularly at the lateral aspect. Lateral pole of the condyle extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Appears to be a pannus surrounding the discal tissue.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle that has fairly good width and in fact extends slightly beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat and doesn't curve down much at all, and the downward curvature is less than the opposite side. Appears that there may be discal tissue in the joint area. May be slightly medially displaced. Appears to be a pannus surrounding the discal tissue. Superomedial aspect of the fossa appears to have extremely thin bone, although it looks somewhat better than the opposite side.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head. Cortical bone is a little hard to see on the head of the condyle in two or three of the views. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Out laterally, it appears that the articular disc is vertically oriented within the fossa. More medially, the disc has a little bit better positioned. There is some fluid in the superior joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and it appears that the disc does reduce into position. The disc reduces fairly early. Through the cuts included, which doesn't get all the way through the medial aspect of the condyle, the fossa appears to be intact.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle. Cortical bone appears thin at the lateral aspect. Articular eminence is fairly steep similar to the opposite side. The articular disc is vertically oriented in the fossa, and out laterally it is anteriorly displaced. Toward the medial aspect of the joint, the disc is in better position. There is fluid in both the superior and inferior joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and the disc reduces early on.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation at the lateral aspect with early reduction
<LOCATION> mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint with early reduction

