B030

Effexor XR 75 mg one <LOCATION>
Singulair 10 mg tablets.
Temazepam 30 mg q.h.s.
Vivelle Dot patch.
Diazepam 5 mg pr
Ibuprofen 600 mg at each dose.
Flexeril 10 mg.

B030 rates her headaches that are predominantly on the right side at a level of 9 that occur in the frontal, temporal, posterior head and on the top of head. She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 7, diet at 9, and disability at 9. She gets right-sided severe earaches, right-sided tinnitus, and right-sided vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her knees and hands. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime. Bruxism is quite severe to the point that she is fracturing some of her crowns on her teeth.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B030 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm. The maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline and chin. In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency by about 3 mm and some AP chin deficiency by probably 6-8 mm. <PERSON> neckline is moderately long, although the chin neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, B030 is missing the right second bicuspid, first molar. She has a crown prep on the first bicuspid and second molar, but the bridge is absent on it right now. On the left side, she is missing second bicuspid, second and third molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the right central incisors replaced by a bridge. B030 has an anterior deep bite of about 5-6 mm. She has a Class II end-on cuspid-molar relationship being probably about a good 4-5 mm probably Class II. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and a slight reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Uvula is mild to moderately elongated. Her tonsils have been removed. Intranasally, her turbinates appear normal in size. The septum is deviated off a little bit towards the right side, but there is still what appears to be good airway with no obvious obstruction. To palpation, she has low severe pain over the right TMJ and moderate to high moderate pain over the right masseter, right medial pterygoid, right retromandibular area, and milder pain over the right temporalis, right SCM, right posterior neck, and right shoulder and left retromandibular area. She does have a glitch on opening in the right TMJ of probably 5-10 mm of opening. She has some crepitus if she opens wider. Maximal incisal opening is 32 mm and about 20 mm without significant pain. Excursion movement to the right is 7 mm, to the left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of the four third molars as well as the mandibular right second molar, left secondary bicuspid, first molar, and left second bicuspid. In the upper arch, she is missing the right central incisor and both third molars. She has root canals on the mandibular left first molar, right second molar, right second bicuspid as well as the maxillary first molar. She also appears to have a root canal on the maxillary left central incisor. Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. <LOCATION> appear moderate in size. Sinuses appear clear. Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and that the turbinates are relatively normal in size with what appears to be good functional airway. Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. Joint space actually looks fairly good. There are probably some minor bone changes, but nothing real significant. Right TMJ sagittal view shows that she has some significant arthritic change in the right joint with what appears to bone-on-bone contact between the condyle and fossa. There is some anterior beaking present. There is arthritis affecting both the fossa area and the condyle area. More medial the joint space is much better balanced. Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is decreased lateral joint space, but the rest of the joint space looks reasonably good. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm. Right TMJ coronal tomograms show that there is significantly decreased lateral joint space with what appears to be bone-on-bone contact. More medially, there is better joint space. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some mild maxillary and mandibular retronathia. She has increased occlusal plane angle of basically a skeletal Class I. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm.

<LOCATION> arthritis with the right side worse than the left side. Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia. High occlusal plane angle. Class II end-on occlusion. Anterior deep bite of 5-6 mm.
Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
TMJ pain. Myofascial pain. Headaches. Sleep apnea symptoms.

Preliminary restorative dentistry, place temporary caps on the right first bicuspid and second molar. Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. <LOCATION> reconstruction with mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction.. <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the arches with implants and crowns versus crown and bridges.

B030 MRI AGE: 49/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral width. There appear to be some degenerative changes in the fossa. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat. Difficult to identify discal tissue, although there does appear to be some medially displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that probably has moderately good mediolateral width. There is decreased vertical joint space and there appears to be a little inflammation in the joint space. There appears to be discal tissue medially displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa is flat. There is fluid in the medial joint space.


<LOCATION> mild arthritis and articular disc medially displaced but with reduction on opening. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced and perhaps laterally displaced with reduction on opening.
Both discs appear to be salvageable.

