TAMIRA O’LOUGHLIN 01/23/2009

<PERSON> is 47 years old. She had a skiing accident about 20 years ago where
she fell, striking her chest and subluxated her mandible. It went back
in place on its own. She developed clicking and popping in her jaw
joints in her 30s, however, she did not develop pain problems until
2005. Since then, she has had extensive treatments including the

1.  Lavage of the right TMJ x2 with probable steroid injections.

2.  Steroid injections into the right joint approximately 30 times.

3.  Splint therapy x4.

4.  Physical therapy.

5.  Lidocaine infusion.

6.  Attempt at electro-rhizotomy to kill the nerve in right <LOCATION>.


1.  Clonidine 0.1 mg 2 tabs b.i.d.

2.  Gabapentin 1200 mg q.h.s. and 600 mg b.i.d.

3.  Seroquel 50 mg t.i.d., 300 mg q.h.s.

4.  Effexor XR 150 mg q.d.

5.  Prilosec 40 mg q.d.

6.  Zofran 4 mg b.i.d.

7.  Visteril 50 mg t.i.d.

8.  Zantac 150 mg b.i.d.

9.  Doxepin 100 mg q.h.s.

10. Advair inhaler p.r.n.

<PERSON>’s pain is predominantly confined to the right side, but
occasionally the left side will be symptomatic, but the majority of
problems are on the right side. She rates her headaches at 7 in the
right temporal area, right TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 10, jaw
function at 7, diet at 8, disability at 10. With the current medication
regimen that she is on, <PERSON> has gained 50 pounds in the past 6 months.
She gets frequent right-sided earaches and moderate vertigo, but no
tinnitus or hearing loss. She has had her shoulders and hands
reconstructed. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at night as well as
during the day, and she feels this is getting worse for her. In
addition, <PERSON> has sleep apnea symptoms which have been present for
approximately 2 years. <PERSON> states that she has severe snoring and
moderate daytime somnolence. She was diagnosed with sleep apnea 2 years
ago of a moderate degree. She has moderate to severe difficulties
sleeping at night. She smokes about a half a pack of cigarettes per day
and has done this for about 30 years. She has had previous sinus surgery
and a septoplasty.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. She has some slight increased fullness in
the right TMJ area and perhaps the right angle area. Upper lip length is
about 22 mm and upper tooth lip relationship is probably about -2 to 3
mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The
mandibular dental midline is shifted 2 mm to the left. The chin is
shifted about 3 to 4 mm to the left. In profile, she has some AP
maxillary deficiency of probably 4 to 5 mm and the chin about 4 to 5 mm
as well. Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first and second
bicuspids and on the left side she is missing probably a first bicuspid.
In the upper arch, she is missing the left bicuspids and molars, and on
the right side she is missing the molars. She is basically a Class I
cuspid on the left side, but Class III cuspid on the right side. She has
an end-on incisor relationship and cross bite tendency probably on the
left side. She has a cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being
about 2 mm higher than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look
healthy. Soft palate may be somewhat elongated. Fascial pillars and
tonsils appear relatively normal. Nasal septum is deviated a little bit
off towards the right side. <LOCATION> appear moderate in size, but
there does not appear at least clinically to be any significant nasal
airway obstruction. <PERSON> is currently on a CPAP machine. To palpation,
she has moderate pain over the right temporalis, right medial pterygoid,
and high moderate over the right masseter, and severe pain over the
right TMJ. Maximal incisal opening is 27 mm, but that is with
significant pain. Excursion movement to the right about 3 mm, to the
left only 2 to 2.5 mm. <PERSON> does have a partial denture that she can
wear in the upper arch. <PERSON> appears to have a component of
macroglossia.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. The septum appears reasonably straight.
<LOCATION> are moderate in size and there appears to be good airway.
Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Panorex shows she is missing mandibular left first bicuspid, mandibular
right first bicuspid, second bicuspid, and all the molars, but the first
molar has been replaced with an implant. In the upper arch, she is
missing the left bicuspids and molars, and on the right side she is
missing bicuspids and molars, but she has 2 implants replacing the
bicuspids on that right side. Sinuses appear relatively clear. There is
a little flattening on the anterior condyle on the left joint. Right
joint shows significant arthritic changes and difficult to evaluate any
joint space. It appears there may be a little bit of reactive bone
around the joint.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms shows that the condyle appears slightly
arthritic, but not too significant. Joint space looks almost excessive.
The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably at least 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows significant degenerative changes with
erosions of the fossa and of the condyle. Some areas appear to have
bone-on-bone contact. There is heterotopic bone growing down around the
lateral pole of the condyle. There is significantly decreased joint
space.

Left TMJ sagittal views show a condyle with increased vertical joint
space. Articular eminence is moderate in inclination and not very long
in length. The condyle appears to be somewhat posteriorly positioned in
the fossa. The condyle appears to have reasonably good shape. There is a
little bit of flattening and degenerative changes at the lateral aspect
of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a joint that is severely arthritic. There
is reactive bone in the fossa and significant degenerative changes at
the condyle. Out laterally, there appears to be heterotopic bone that
has developed around the condyle, particularly around the posterior
aspect. There is decreased joint space and just severe degenerative
changes. The articular eminence is shallow and eroded.

Lateral cephalogram shows that <PERSON> has a significantly decreased
oropharyngeal airway and at the soft palate level, the AP dimension is
only about 3 mm. At the base of the tongue, it is about 7 mm. She has a
slight skeletal Class III jaw relationship.


1.  Severe degenerative arthritis with heterotopic bone formation and
    anklyosis of the right TMJ.

2.  Left TMJ mild arthritis, deformation of the articular disc with
    medial dislocation.

3.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

5.  Class I cuspid relationship on the left side, Class III cuspid
    relationship on the right side.

6.  Missing maxillary bicuspids and molars with two dental implants in
    the bicuspid areas in the right maxilla.

7.  Missing mandibular left first bicuspid and mandibular right
    bicuspids and molars with the first molar replaced with an implant.

8.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm
    at the soft palate level and 7 mm at the base of the tongue (normal
    dimensions in those two areas are 11 mm).

9.  Severe TMJ pain.

10. Severe headaches.

11. Severe myofascial pain.

12. Hyperplastic soft palate.

13. Sleep apnea syndrome with requirement of CPAP management.



    a.  Pain management.

    b.  Reevaluate and eliminate unnecessary medications that she is
        currently on.

2.  CT scan of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.

    c.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

    d.  <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    e.  Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty.

    f.  Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.

4.  Dental reconstruction.

She apparently tried to commit suicide at one time. She was on numerous
pain medications and states she was not aware of it, but did attempt
suicide. She is going to be seeing a new psychiatrist very soon and
hopefully we will be able to eliminate many of the medications she is
currently on. I did give her a prescription for the following

1.  Norco 10, dispensing 120, 1 tablet q.4 to 6 hours p.r.n. pain.

2.  <LOCATION>, dispensing 60 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., ½ tablet b.i.d.

She is to keep me informed of her progress.
