<PERSON> O'DONNELL 10/01/2007

<PERSON> is 14 years old and is referred by Dr. <PERSON>. The primary
concern for <PERSON> is the lower jaw is growing in a more rapid rate than
the upper jaw. Dr. <PERSON> has been following <PERSON> for about 3 years in
reference to the bite situation.

<PERSON> has no problems with TMJ pain, headaches, myofacial pain,
earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. No other joints bothering
him. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism. The only medication he
takes in Focalin 15 mg for ADD. He apparently has no breathing issues
except the parents are aware of breathing through his mouth when he
sleeps occasionally.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good facial symmetry. Upper lip length is
about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary,
mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.
In profile view, <PERSON> may have just some slight AP maxillary
deficiency. The chin appears a little bit AP deficient as well.
Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second
molars. He has some mild to moderate crowding in the lower anterior
arch. He has good attached gingiva present. In the upper arch he has all
of his teeth back to the second molars. The upper arch appears somewhat
constricted. A little bit of a Class III cuspid relationship by probably
3 mm on the right side whereas the first molar is probably 4 mm Class
III and on the left side sort of a similar kind of relationship. He has
bilateral posterior crossbites with a tendency towards an end-on incisor
relationship. He may have about ½ mm vertical overbite relationship.
Oropharyngeal airway looks healthy. The uvula and soft palate appears
pretty much normal. Faucial pillars may be just mildly constricted but
not too significant. Tonsils are probably mild to moderate in size.
Intranasally, the base of the septum is deviated off towards the right
side. The right turbinate is moderately enlarged and appears to be
touching against the septum. On the left side, the turbinate is quite
large and is touching against the septum and it seems to be creating a
significant airway blockage on that side. The quality of the tissue
around the turbinate is boggy and irritated in appearance. He is not
aware of snoring or any significant daytime somnolence due to airway
problems nor any sleep apnea symptoms. Maximal incisal opening is about
47 mm. Excursive movements are about 9 mm in each direction. To
palpation, he has some very minimal tenderness over the masseter muscles
but no tenderness around the head and neck area.


Panorex shows the absence of 4 third molars. All other teeth are present
and accounted for. Sinuses look reasonably clear.

Waters view show that he has large frontal sinuses. The sinuses appear
fairly clear. The septum appears fairly straight in the bony area.
<LOCATION> appear to fill considerable volume in the nasal cavity. The
left side seems pretty much obliterated and the right side is fairly
close.

Left TMJ tomogram shows there appears to be good joint space. Articular
eminence is moderately steep. Joint space may be just slightly decreased
posteriorly.

<PERSON> O'DONNELL 10/01/2007 Page 2

Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit more difficult to evaluate. Articular
eminence is moderately steep. There seems to be some decreased posterior
joint space. On opening, there is fairly good translation of both
joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has a high angle in the
occlusal plane and a Class II skeletal relationship although the
occlusion itself appears slightly Class III in the molar area.
Oropharyngeal airway is fairly normal.


1.  Rule out bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

2.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

5.  Class III end-on occlusion.

6.  Bilateral posterior crossbites and tendency towards anterior
    crossbite.

7.  AP microgenia.

8.  Crowding in the lower anterior arch.

9.  Crowding in maxillary arch.

10. Hypertrophied turbinates.

11. Nasal airway obstruction.

12. High occlusal plane angle.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
        osteotomies if they are necessary.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Consider slenderizing the lower
        anterior teeth removing no more than 1 to 2 mm of tooth
        structure to keep from flaring the lower incisors any further
        forward and to help compensate for the small tooth size
        discrepancy.

2.  Continue to monitor maxillary growth and develop to confirm the
    presence or absence of condylar hyperplasia.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies with articular disc
        repositioning of Mitek anchors (only if condylar hyperplasia is
        confirmed.)

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in
        a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect
        superiorly and posterior aspect inferiorly and expand.

    d.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin and
        reduce the vertical height.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
