<PERSON><PERSON> is 52 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON> and Dr. <PERSON>, 4610 <PERSON>, <LOCATION>. A-9, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>. <PERSON> has had previous
tonsillectomy, C-section, appendectomy and ovary removed. <PERSON> has
been told by Dr. <PERSON> that she has arthritis in her jaw joints
as well as in her neck. She says she has other joints that feel like she
has arthritis there.


1.  <PERSON> 10 mg daily.

2.  Prilosec 20 mg daily.

3.  Zyrtec 10 mg daily.

4.  Steroid ointment.

5.  Multivitamin.


1.  Teeth do not meet.

2.  Difficulty chewing.

3.  Painful yawning.

4.  Headaches.

5.  Jaw joint pain.

6.  Jaw fatigue.

Date of onset for <PERSON>'s problems may have began as long as 30 years
ago when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident when she was about
16. She apparently had a whiplash injury but was unaware of jaw problems
at that time. It was only about 2 years ago that she really began
developing problems when she would get a closed lock situation. She had
a nightguard in 2005 to try to relieve some of the symptoms. Her
problems got worse about 1 year ago. She had physical therapy from
November of 2005 to January 2006. The physical therapy got the locking
undone and she could open wider but continued to have locking problems.
She then underwent splint therapy from January through August of 2006.
The splint therapy did change her occlusion. She stopped the splint
therapy in August then about 3 months later her bite shifted back into
where the teeth did begin to meet again.

<PERSON> gets headaches that occur predominately in the temple area but
can come to the frontal area about 5 times per week although more
recently they have decreased slightly from that occurrence rate that she
registers at a level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily
pain 5, jaw function at 7, diet at 5 and disability at 1.

She gets earaches bilaterally but no problems with tinnitus, vertigo or
hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her neck, wrists,
fingers and toes. She has no known allergies and no problems wearing
jewelry. She is aware of clenching at nighttime.


In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 1. Maxillary mandibular dental midlines are pretty much on the
facial midline. <PERSON> may be just slightly off to the right side a couple
of mm.

<PERSON> Page 2

In profile view, <PERSON> has fairly good balance between the upper lip,
cheeks and nose. <PERSON> appears somewhat retruded of probably about 10 mm.
Chin-neckline is a little bit short. She has a head postured forward
neck position. Chin-neck angle is moderately well defined. Intraorally,
<PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She
has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has good
attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch,
<PERSON> has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a
Class II end-on cuspid relationship being about 3 to 4 mm Class II on
the left side and maybe 4 mm on the right side. She has an anterior deep
bite of about 2 mm. Intranasally, the septum appears reasonably
straight. <LOCATION> appear moderately enlarged but <PERSON> does not
complain of difficulties breathing through her nose. To palpation she
has moderate pain over the left masseter and very mild tenderness over
the SCMs, shoulders, left styloid area and left TMJ. On opening, she
would inconsistently have an audibile pop on the left side with probably
about 35 to 40 mm of opening. She had a closing pop of probably 30 mm.
The right side seems to function relatively smoothly. <PERSON> has a
transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the right side being 1 to 1.5
mm higher than the left side. She has some lower arch asymmetry with the
right cuspid being about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. She has some
fairly significant crowding in the lower anterior arch. <PERSON> has had
her wisdom teeth removed.


Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. Sinuses look relatively
clear. <PERSON> appears moderately enlarged. <PERSON> appear a little
bit arthritic with the right one appearing much smaller in size compared
to the left one.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. There appears to be some
deviation in the nasal septum particularly in the bony area. The
turbinates look moderately enlarged. Vertical asymmetry is appreciated
in the mandible where the right angle is probably 4 to 5 mm higher than
the left angle.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it.
Articular eminence is fairly steep. Perhaps some decreased superior
joint space. Otherwise, the joint space does not look too bad.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is much smaller in size. There
appears to be pseudocyst in the condyle. There is anterior beaking
present. Significantly decreased vertical joint space. Articular
eminence is much more shallow than the left side. On opening in both
joints there is fairly good translation with there actually being a
little bit greater translation on the left side than the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a skeletal Class
II and an occlusal Class II malocclusion. Suprisingly, the oropharyngeal
airway actually looks to be in better dimension than anticipated
although the airway at the soft palate level is only about 6 mm as well
as at the base of the tongue. Tooth size analysis reveals that <PERSON>
has a tooth size discrepancy of 1 mm. The dental model also reveals that
she has some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch and some
crowding in the upper anterior arch as well.

<PERSON> Page 3


1.  <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc dislocation without
    reduction.

2.  AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  Class II occlusion.

5.  Crowding in lower anterior arch.

6.  Crowding in upper anterior arch.

7.  High occlusal plane angle.

8.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

9.  TMJ pain.

10. Headaches.

11. Myofacial pain.

12. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference about 1 mm.

13. Lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid 2 mm anterior to the right
    cuspid.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure. Use Class III
        elastics on the left side if tolerated to try to distalize the
        left mandibular cuspid which is 2 mm anterior to the right
        cuspid. Consider slenderizing the first molar and the bicuspids
        on the mandibular left side to help achieve the AP shift in the
        left cuspid.

2.  CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

3.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a
        counterclockwise direction with total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior
        aspect.

    c.  <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    d.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
