JOY <PERSON> 06-02-04

Joy is 48 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 4610 <PERSON>,
<PERSON>. A-6, <LOCATION>, TX 79705 and Dr. <PERSON>, 3000 <PERSON>, <LOCATION>.
220, <LOCATION>, TX 79705. She also has seen Dr. <PERSON>, 4610 <PERSON>, <LOCATION>. A-9, <LOCATION>, TX 79705.

Patient History

Joy has had a previous appendectomy, and she also has had two
C-sections. Otherwise she is in good health except for arthritis in
multiple joints, and she has painful swollen joints. She does drink a
lot of ginger water and does have some Celebrex on hand for when she has
flare-ups. She also takes meclizine for dizziness, but this only occurs
about every six months or so.

Joy has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but does have vertigo that
be quite severe causing nausea and vomiting, but this only occurs about
every six months. Other joints that bother her include her wrists,
hands, fingers, hips (left greater than right), ankles, feet, and toes.
She has no known allergies and no known problems wearing jewelry. She is
not aware of any clenching or bruxism.

She did have orthodontics from the age of 15 to 17.

etiology. It was then that she noticed that her bite was changing and
occluding only on her left posterior teeth. In approximately 01/2003,
she did get a splint that she wears essentially all the time except at
mealtimes. This keeps her fairly comfortable. She gets headaches about
two times a month that she rates at about a level of 4 in her head with
no specific delineation in the outside where those headaches occur.
These headaches can last as long as 2 to 3 days. Her more severe
headaches which she gets about twice a year can escalate to about 8 to
9. She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 3, overall pain on an average
day at 1, jaw function at 3, diet at 2, and disability at 0.

Patient Concerns

1.  Her teeth don’t fit together very well

2.  Difficulties eating and chewing

3.  Painful to yawn

4.  Pain in the jaw joints particularly if she doesn’t wear her splints
    and goes through jaw function

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 0.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.
Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off to the left side.
<PERSON> is fairly close to being on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has an obtuse nasolabial angle. Upper lip
supralabrale is just slightly posterior to subnasale. Slight C-shaped
curve to the upper lip. <PERSON> appears AP deficient by probably about 6 to
8 mm. Chin-neckline is somewhat short, although the chin-neck angle is
fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids but has the rest
of her teeth back through the second molars. She has some significant
crowding, lower anterior arch, of probably about 4 mm or so.

Has a little gingival retraction around the lower incisors, although she
has had a gingival graft done there. The left cuspid is probably 1 to 2
mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, she likewise has
had first bicuspids extracted. In centric relation, she occludes only on
the second molars on the left side, and all other teeth are out of
occlusion. She has an open bite on the right side of probably a couple
of millimeters. Mandible appears to be shifted a little bit toward the
left side. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the left
side and right side as well. In the upper arch, the left cuspid is a
millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. <PERSON> appears clear,
although the dimension of the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal
wall may be slightly reduced.

Intranasally, the septum appears to be deviated just a little bit off to
the left side. Right turbinate is larger than the left turbinate but
appears to be adequate airway on both sides. Joy gives a history of
predominantly nose breathing. She does have some problems with snoring,
and she goes through periods where sometimes it will be much more
regular and other times where it won’t be quite as noticeable. It may be
more noticeable when she sleeps on her back. She usually starts sleeping
on her stomach but then eventually will end up on her back because it is
more comfortable for her hips.

Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm but opening without significant
discomfort 30 mm. Excursive movements to the right is 3 mm and to the
left 6 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first
bicuspids. Sinuses look relatively clear except there is a little
mucocele in the maxillary right sinus. The airway looks reasonable good.
She has severe arthritis in the left TMJ and also significant flattening
of the articular eminence. In the right joint she has some significant
arthritis although not nearly as severe as the left side. There is some
anterior beaking present. Appears to be a little calcification in the
left mandibular lingular area. Sinuses dip way down and around the root
structures.

Waters view shows a mucocele in the right maxillary sinus. <LOCATION>
appear moderately enlarged. A little vertical asymmetry with the left
side being about 2 to 3 mm shorter vertically than the right side at the
angle area.

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis affecting both the fossa and
the condyle. Decreased joint space. Significant flattening of the
articular eminence. Posterior protrusion of the condyle is present.
<PERSON> appears sclerotic with what is left of it.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is arthritic but not nearly as
severe as the opposite side. Some anterior beaking is present. Decreased
joint space vertically and particularly at the anterior aspect between
the articular eminence and the condyle.

On opening, there is restricted translation of the left TMJ but
relatively normal translation of the articular TMJ. Styloid process is
fairly long on the right side and not as obvious on the left side.

Cephalometrically, <PERSON> appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency and
some AP mandibular deficiency. Some vertical asymmetry in the mandible
with the left side at the angle being about 5 to 6 mm shorter vertically
than the opposite side. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted
with an airway dimension of less than 5 mm at the soft palate level. At
the base of the tongue, the AP dimension is more like 9 to 10 mm. There
is an anterior open bite present, and she occludes only on the second
molars on the left side. Has a moderately high occlusal plane
angulation. Head is tipped upward and not in a level position which
actually increases her airway more than what it probably really is. Joy
demonstrates a tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 1
although it is probably greater than that because she has some veneers
on the anterior six teeth. This makes the incisal edges significantly
wider by probably an extra millimeter or so. I suspect there is probably
about a 3-mm tooth-size discrepancy.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Left TMJ severe <PERSON> arthritis and articular disc dislocation
    with severe deformation and nonreducing

2.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe
    deformation and nonreducing

3.  AP maxillary deficiency

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

5.  AP mandibular deficiency

6.  Missing all four first bicuspids

7.  Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the left side

8.  Mandibular dental midline shifted to the left 2 mm from the midline
    of the mandible and the facial midline

9.  Occluding only on the right second molars

10. High occlusal plane angle

11. Veneers on maxillary anterior six teeth

12. Tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of probably a
    couple of millimeters

13. Decreased oropharyngeal airway

14. Snoring problems

15. Headaches

16. TMJ pain

17. Vertigo

Recommended Treatment

1.  General dentistry

  Remove veneers from maxillary six teeth

2.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth
        removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring
        them any further forward and help correct for the tooth-size
        discrepancy

3.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol)

4.  Surgery

    A.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a
        counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint
        prostheses

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and downgraft the
        posterior aspect

    C.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

    D.  Bilateral coronoidectomies

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
