<PERSON> 05/23/2005

<PERSON> is 42 years old and is referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 11 Wimpole
St. London, WIG9ST <LOCATION>.


1.  TMJ pain.

2.  Jaw and facial pain.

3.  Headaches.

4.  Limited jaw function.

5.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

6.  Inability to work because of her pain and dysfunctional problems.

7.  Severe daytime tiredness.

8.  Sleep disorder.

9.  Difficulty breathing through the nose.

Her TMJ problems began to the best of her knowledge about 22 months ago
following a third molar extraction. She has had some extensive physical
therapy performed as well as splint therapy and acupuncture. In November
of 2004, she had bilateral disc repositioning procedures performed.
These apparently have been unsuccessful and she continues to have severe
pain, headache and dysfunctional problems.

She gets headaches in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally at
about a level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily pain
around the head and neck area at 5, but it easily escalates to 8. She
rates her jaw function at 9, diet at 7, disability at 8. Maximal incisal
opening is 6 mm. Her excursive movements are less than ½ mm in each
direction. To palpation, she has high moderate pain over the masseter
muscles, moderate pain over the TMJs and milder pain to palpation over
the temporalis, medial pterygoids and styloid areas. She gets earaches,
vertigo and hearing loss that comes and goes. She has no other joint
problems. She does get numbness in her fingers that comes and goes. Her
pain is worse in the afternoons and evenings. Talking and working
significantly increases her pain levels.


Frontal view shows reasonably good left-to-right facial symmetry. Nasal
tip is deviated 2 mm off to the right side. Upper lip length is 22 mm
and tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm. In profile view, she is AP
deficient in the maxilla by 4 to 5 mm and AP deficient in the mandible
by 18 to 20 mm. She has a Class II end-on occlusion and an anterior open
bite of 2 mm. She occludes only on the second molars and all her other
teeth are out of occlusion. She cannot open far enough for me to
evaluate the oropharyngeal areas or to evaluate for any other intraoral
pathology because of the limitation of only 6 mm of opening.


Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left and right third molars and
maxillary right third molar. Maxillary left third molar is somewhat in
position. The patient is occluding only on the second molars and all
other teeth are out of occlusion. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

<PERSON> 05/23/2005 Page 2

Joint appears somewhat arthritic but difficult to tell on this view.
Left turbinate appears enlarged.

Waters view shows that she has a large septal spur off the left side of
the bony septum. <LOCATION> appear quite large and appear to obliterate
the nasal airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the
fossa with decreased posterior and vertical joint space. There is
increased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.
This is likely indicative of anteriorly displaced disc with a closed
lock situation.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the
fossa with decreased posterior and superior joint space. There is some
significant anterior beaking on this side. Articular eminence is
moderately steep. There is increased anterior joint space. Images
compatible with anteriorly displaced disc.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has AP maxillary
deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency. She has an anterior open bite.
She occludes only on the second molars. She has a decreased
oropharyngeal airway. She has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship.


1.  <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc dislocations without
    reductions with adhesions and a closed lock.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  AP mandibular deficiency.

5.  Class II occlusion.

6.  Anterior open bite.

7.  Occludes only on the second molars.

8.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

9.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

10. Nasoseptal deviation with large spur.

11. Nasal airway obstruction.

12. Severe TMJ pain.

13. Severe headaches.

14. Severe myofascial pain.

15. Severe limited jaw opening of only 6 mm.

16. Severe daytime somnolence.

17. Earaches and vertigo.

<PERSON> 05/23/2005 Page 3


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery treatment option 1 (for optimal treatment outcome.)

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    d.  <LOCATION> fat grafts. (Harvest from the abdomen or buttock.)

    e.  Bilateral partial turbinectomies.

    f.  Nasal septoplasty.

3.  Surgical option 2. (This would be significant compromise relative to
    airway and facial balance but would be a good option for eliminating
    the TMJ pain, headaches and myofascial pain as well as
    reestablishing jaw function.)

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and small mandibular advancements
        in a counterclockwise rotation and with total joint prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral fat grafts to TMJs. (Harvest from abdomen or buttock.)

4.  Surgical option 3. (This would be the poorest prognosis relative to
    stability jaw function and elimination of pain. If this procedure
    fails then we would need to proceed on with option #1 or #2. This
    treatment also will not address the airway functional problems nor
    the significant facial imbalance.)

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw
        stabilization.

5.  Post surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Treatment option #1 would give by far the best treatment outcome
relative to function, pain and facial balance. Treatment option #3 has
the poorest prognosis and options #2 and 3 will not address the
significant airway problems nor the significant facial imbalances that
are present.
