<PERSON> PRATES 05-17-02

<PERSON> is 45 years old. He is referred by Dr. <PERSON> to us.

Patient Concerns


1.  His teeth don’t fit together.

2.  He has an open bite.

3.  Can wake up with pain in the jaw area.

4.  Headache problem and he sometimes wakes up with headaches.

He doesn’t have any problems he is aware of in reference to clicking and
popping in his jaw joints. There are no earaches, ringing in his ears,
except occasionally, and he has no vertigo.

Current Medications

Currently he takes no medications.

Patient History

He has no other joint problems. He recently had an injury to his foot,
and that still bothers him some.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry
in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm.
Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline
is shifted to the right probably 2 mm. Nasal tip is also off to the
right probably 1 mm or 2. Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to
the right about 2 to 3 mm. <PERSON> is off to the right approximately 4 to 5
mm.

In profile view, <PERSON> has good facial balance between the upper lip,
cheeks, and nose. There could be just slight AP deficiency of possibly 2
to 3 mm. Mandible is retruded probably 10 to 15 mm in the chin area.
Chin-neckline is not well-defined, and submental area is quite full.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of lower teeth back through the third molar
bilaterally. He has crowns on the mandibular left first and second
molars and right first molar. He has some minor spacing between some of
his lower teeth. He appears to have adequately attached gingiva. He has
a slightly accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the third
molars. There is basically a Class I cuspid relationship on the right
side and just slight Class II cuspid on the left side. He has an open
bite that extends from the left first bicuspid through the right first
bicuspid. The open bite is worse on the left side as compared to the
right side.

Maxillary arch actually appears relatively level or the left cuspid may
be up about a millimeter. Mandibular arch is asymmetric with the left
cuspid/bicuspid being about 2 mm lower than the right side. Lower arch
is asymmetric with the right cuspid being almost 2 mm posterior to the
left cuspid. Likewise, in the upper arch, the right cuspid is 2 mm
posterior to the left cuspid.

TMJs function smoothly.

<PERSON> appears clear. Uvula may be slightly enlarged. However, the
posterior faucial pillars appear to be attached more anteriorly and the
lateral pharyngeal wall there appears to be good oropharyngeal airway
space at least on clinical exam.

Intranasally, the turbinates are moderate-sized, but there appears to be
adequate airway.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth including the third molars.
He has root canals on the mandibular left second molar and mandibular
right first molar. Sinuses appear as though there is a mucous retention
cyst in the right sinus, but otherwise the sinuses look fairly clear.
Left turbinate appears to block the airway. Anterior open bite appears
to be present. The condyles look fairly normal.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear, although
there is some increased cloudiness in the right maxillary sinus. Nasal
airway looks reasonably clear. Frontal sinuses are huge.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the condyles appear to have fairly good
morphology. Joint space looks fairly good though maybe a decreased
anterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows good joint morphology. Articular eminences are
fairly steep in both joints. Joint space is good in the right joint
around the condyle.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric evaluation shows evidence of the mucous retention
cyst in the maxillary right sinus. Lips are forced together with
hyperfunction of the mentalis muscle. Oropharyngeal airway is relatively
normal with about 11 mm of airway space. There appears to be a skeletal
Class II jaw relationship with overangulation of the lower incisors.


1.  Maxillary asymmetry and posterior vertical deficiency.

2.  Mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry.

3.  AP microgenia.

4.  Anterior open bite of about 5 mm on the left side, about 2 mm
    anteriorly, and about a millimeter on the right side.

5.  Slight Class II occlusion on the left side.

6.  Arch asymmetry in the maxilla and mandible with the right cuspids
    being approximately 2 mm posterior to the left cuspids.

7.  Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch.

8.  Slight accentuated curved of occlusion, lower arch.

9.  Mandibular left cuspid and bicuspids are vertically lower in the
    occlusal plane as compared to the opposite side.

10. Rule out ankylosis of left cuspid/bicuspids.

11. Over-contour of mandibular left first molar crown with that crown
    being built up into a previously existing open bite.

12. Retained third molars x 4.

13. High occlusal plane angulation.

14. Probable nocturnal clenching and bruxism.

15. <PERSON>’s tooth-size discrepancy with almost a 2-mm difference with
    the upper teeth being larger compared to the lower teeth.

16. Headaches.

17. Myofascial pain.

Recommended Treatment

1.  Consider using <LOCATION> to control nocturnal clenching

2.  Redo crown on mandibular left first molar to build it slightly out
    of occlusion, creating an open bite in that area with a temporary
    crown (the current crown was built to put the tooth into occlusion
    when it probably originally was in an open bite position)

3.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Place compensating step in the
        maxillary arch wire between the cuspids and the laterals to
        align the anterior four teeth at an elevated level compared to
        the cuspids and the posterior teeth. Try to extrude the cuspids
        inferiorly some, particularly on the left side.

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Be careful because of possible
        ankylosis of the left cuspid/first bicuspids (PDL is not as
        clear on the left side as the right side, and, thus, the teeth
        are slightly submerged compared to the opposite arch).

4.  Surgery

    A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to level the occlusal plane,
        correct asymmetries, downgraft the posterior aspect, and move
        the cuspid area upwards.

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible
        back on the facial midline and close the open bite.

    C.  Osseous augmentation genioplasty.

    D.  Consider removal of third molars if desired from an orthodontic
        standpoint.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

6.  Restorative dentistry to place permanent crown on the mandibular
    left first molar
