<PERSON> 08-29-03

Ximena is 13 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON> from Sabana
Norte, 50 W. Interfin Bank, P.O. Box 3537-1000, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.

Patient History

Ximena is in good health with no major medical problems.

She gives no history of headaches, TMJ pain, earaches, vertigo, etc. She
states that she doesn’t have any noises in her joints.

Patient Concerns

1.  Her teeth don’t fit together

2.  She has a significantly gummy smile

3.  Makes noises when she sleeps

4.  Mouth breathing particularly when sleeping

5.  Cannot chew with her lips together

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Sometimes when she smiles she has a little bit of hyperfunction on the
left side of her upper lip as compared to the right side. Upper lip
length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 9 mm.
Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the
facial midline. She has some slight AP maxillary deficiency. She has
significant lip incompetence of probably about 10 mm. <PERSON> is retruded,
and chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly
well-defined. <PERSON> is probably a good 10 to 12 mm AP deficient.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. Teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. In the upper arch, she
also has all of her teeth back through the second molars present and are
well-aligned and leveled. She has some hyper-inflammation of the gingiva
in the upper arch probably due to excessive exposure. She has almost a
full class II cuspid relationship being probably at least 5 mm Class II.
She has an overjet of probably about 5 mm and vertical overbite of
probably about 4 mm. She has had her lower third molars removed, and
this was done by Dr. <PERSON>. Transverse occlusal plane appears
fairly level with the eyes, but the right side appears to be about a
millimeter lower than the left side compared to the ears. I feel the
symmetry is better with the eyes.

To palpation, she had only some very minimal tenderness over the <LOCATION>
area of maybe 1 to 2. TMJs, however, seem to function very smoothy and
no other signs or symptoms of having any TMJ problems.

Intranasally, septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side, and
there is a spur at the base of the septum on the left side. <LOCATION>
are quite large, particularly on the left side, that seem to cause some
significant obstruction of the airway and the right side at least
anteriorly although the turbinate is quite large, but with the deviated
septum, the airway appears better, although difficult to assess the
posterior aspect. <PERSON> appears clear. She has her tonsils and
appears to have some adenoid tissue posteriorly but no inflammation
present.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that there may be a little mucous cyst in the right sinus.
<LOCATION> appear fairly large. A spur is seen coming off the left side
of the septum. Impacted maxillary third molars are present. Good space
between the upper lateral incisor and cuspids. Absent mandibular third
molars. <PERSON> look a little bit different sizes on this particular
radiograph.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good shape. Could be a
little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately
steep but not very long vertically. Joint space appears fairly good
superiorly and posteriorly.

Right TMJ tomogram appears that she is postured forward a little bit
here. There is an increased posterior joint space. <PERSON> looks similar
in shape to the opposite side. Articular eminence is perhaps even more
shallow on this side than the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Waters view shows that the sinuses all appear fairly clear. <LOCATION>
appear a little bit large, although there may be some airway passage on
the right side. Septum is deviated a little bit off toward the left
side. Left side appears pretty much obstructed. About one month ago, she
did have sinusitis and took an antibiotic for that.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class II jaw relationship. She has
a huge adenoid mass in the nasopharynx area which is probably causing
most of her nasal airway obstruction. Tonsils are seen on the
radiograph. Significant vertical maxillary excess is noted.
Oropharyngeal airway dimensions are fairly good, and again the major
obstruction is at the nasopharynx area where she has a huge adenoid
mass.

<PERSON>’s analysis shows a <PERSON>’s difference of 2 mm in the anterior
six teeth. Also, in a Class I position there is a transverse maxillary
deficiency. Deficiency is probably about 5 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess

2.  Transverse maxillary deficiency

3.  AP mandibular deficiency

4.  Class II occlusion

5.  Hypertrophied turbinates

6.  Severely hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue

7.  Severe nasal airway obstruction

8.  Impacted maxillary third molars

9.  Severe lip incompetence (9 to 10 mm)

10. High occlusal plane angulation

11. Tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of approximately 2
    mm

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch keeping the maxillary
        lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped
        distally as they currently are

    B.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower
        anterior teeth removing approximately no more than 2 mm of tooth
        structure to help compensate for the tooth-size discrepancy

2.  Surgery

    A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly
        approximately 7 to 8 mm, expand it, and decrease the occlusal
        plane angulation

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction

    C.  Bilateral partial turbinectomies

    D.  Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy

    E.  Surgical removal of impacted maxillary third molars x 2

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
