<PERSON>

44-year-old female. <PERSON> is a singer and her current situation is
interfering with her abilities to pursue her singing and acting career.
She was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 1987 at the age of 20
and developed left TMJ problems and severe pain. In addition, she was in
an MVA in 2005, and, although she did not hit her jaw directly, her head
and jaws were shaken around quite a bit. She was diagnosed with
fibromyalgia about 11 years ago. Primary problems since the accident in
1987, she has had migraine type headaches. They occur predominantly on
the left side and she gets them two to four times a month. When she gets
her headaches, they are around about an 8. Her average daily TMJ pain is
at 4 and her average daily pain including headaches and myofascial pain
is at a level of 8. She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 7,
disability at 3. She some gets some earaches, some tinnitus
occasionally, and vertigo occasionally. Other joints that bother her
include her shoulders, thumbs, right hip, left knee, neck and back. To
palpation, she has mild to moderate pain through most of the head and
neck area with the TMJ pain levels being at a 6. She has crepitation in
her joints, the left side greater than the right side. Occlusally, she
has a Class I occlusion on the left and Class II end-on occlusion on the
right, and an overbite of 3 mm. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Tooth lip
relationship is 3 mm. The maxillary midline and mandibular dental
midline are shifted 1 mm to the left and chin is about 4 to 5 mm to the
left. In profile, the upper jaw is retruded about 4 mm and the chin is
retruded about 10 to 12 mm. She is missing all four third molars and the
maxillary left first molar, mandibular left second molar. She has
moderate to severe snoring, severe daytime tiredness, and she does wake
up unable to catch her breath at times. Her turbinates are enlarged and
she has a deviated septum. Intraorally, oropharyngeal tissues look
reasonably healthy with a slightly elongated uvula, but with narrow
fascial pillars. Her incisal opening is 45 mm and right excursion
movement is 7 mm and left excursion movement 8 mm. There is a cant in
the transverse occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm higher than
the right side.


1.  <LOCATION> advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocations
    without reduction with severe deformation. There is more condylar
    resorption on the left side than the right side.

2.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

3.  Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.

4.  Moderately high occlusal plane angle.

5.  Transverse facial asymmetry with the left cuspids being about 3 mm
    higher than the right cuspids.

6.  Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I on the left
    side.

7.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

8.  Deviated nasal septum.

9.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

10. Snoring.

11. Daytime somnolence.

12. Sleep apnea.

13. Narrowed fascial pillars.

14. TMJ pain.

15. Headaches.

16. Myofascial pain.


1. Restorative dentistry to salvage remaining teeth and those requiring
crowns having temporary crowns placed.

2. Orthodontics.

a. Align and level maxillary arch.

b. Align and level mandibular arch.

3. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

4. Surgery.

a. <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement as well as
correction of asymmetry with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.

b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect,
advance about 4 mm and level it transversely.

c. Bilateral coronoidotomies.

d. <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

e. Bilateral partial turbinectomies.

<PERSON> septoplasty.

g. Reconstruct posterior fascial pillars.

5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

6. Restorative dentistry to replace missing teeth and finalize the
occlusion.

The additional problems she has been diagnosed with include the

1.  Scoliosis.

2.  Fibromyalgia.

3.  Irritable bowel syndrome.

4.  Fibroids of the uterus.

5.  Osteoarthritis of the neck and bulging disks.

6.  Allergies to dust, mold, cats, seasonal, etc.

7.  Asthma.

She did have injections for allergies for 13 years, but currently is not
on injections.
