<PERSON> 07-02-03

<PERSON> was referred by Dr. <PERSON>, <LOCATION>, #125-302, <PERSON>, <LOCATION> 11000, <LOCATION>.

Patient History

<PERSON> was born with a cleft lip and palate and has had six surgeries to
repair his lip, palate, and also has a pharyngeal flap. He has had two
knee operations and has had an appendectomy. He previously has had
hepatitis <PERSON> was born with a unilateral right cleft lip and and
palate. He had his multiple repairs and had a prosthesis made for the
maxilla to replace the missing teeth and establish an occlusion in 1985
by Dr. <PERSON>, who is now retired. <PERSON> has been up to <LOCATION>
recently and has made about eight trips there in hopes of having a new
prosthesis constructed, but the new prosthesis that was made for him did
not work and did not function properly. He has the current prosthesis
that he has had since 1985 that works very well for him. He is concerned
since Dr. <PERSON> has retired if something happens to this prosthesis, will
he be able to get another one made. The last attempt to make a new one
done in <LOCATION> did not work. He has no trouble eating and chewing.
He is pleased with his speech. He does have a complaint that he does
snore when he sleeps. By history, <PERSON> states that he has had a
pharyngeal flap procedure performed. With the newest prosthesis that he
had made, he could not even chew a piece of pancake. With his original
prosthesis, he can eat pretty much want he wants including carrots, etc.
<PERSON> has no concerns about his appearance at all and is very pleased
with those factors.

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Tooth-to-lip relationship is -2 mm.
Maxillary, mandibular, and <PERSON> are all pretty much aligned on
the facial midline. Has an elongated columella in the frontal view.

In profile view, he has some significant retrusion of the maxilla by
probably 6 mm or so. <PERSON> is retruded about 15 to 20 mm. Chin-neckline
is extremely short and virtually nonexistent.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second
molars. He has adequate attached gingiva. Teeth are fairly well aligned
and leveled.

In the upper arch, he is missing all four incisors, left first bicuspid,
and all four third molars. He has crowns on the mandibular left first
and second molar, right cuspid and first and second molars, and partial
crowns on the maxillary right bicuspids and first molar. Has partial
crowns on the left second bicuspid, first molar. He has a prosthesis
replacing the four incisors. He has a Class III end-on cuspid
relationship and hits on his back teeth and has a little bit of an
anterior open bite problem and almost an end-on incisor relationship.

His TMJs function smoothly. He has no history of headaches or TMJ
problems.

Examining the prosthesis, it is an overlay denture made out of metal.
Obviously has acrylic facing and acrylic teeth on it. It has metal
occlusal surfaces on the posterior teeth. <PERSON>, he has an oronasal
fistula that measures probably about 4 or 5 mm in diameter and in
length. He has some alveolar atrophy in that area and probably lack of
bone. <PERSON> looks clear. He has a pharyngeal flap back there, but
it is extremely narrow. He has a good nasal airway. Pharyngeal flap may
not be too effectual in its design function.

Intranasally, he has some constricture of the luminal valve on the right
side. <LOCATION> look moderate in size. A little deviation of the septum
but does not appear to be creating any airway problems intranasally.
Left side of the nose is shorter vertically than the left side, so the
right side is a little bit vertically shorter than the left side.
Apparently by history, <PERSON> states that his cleft lip was repaired by a
hand surgeon. The hand surgeon saw the premaxilla and just cut it out
and discarded it. That is probably the reason for the significant AP
deficiency of the maxilla.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the four maxillary incisors and left first
bicuspid. All four third molars are missing. There is a root canal in
the mandibular left first molar. Does not appear to be any significant
bone in the anterior maxillary area. Sinuses appear clear. <LOCATION> is
deviated off toward the left side, and turbinates are of moderate size.

Waters view shows the sinuses are relatively clear but may be just a
little bit increased cloudiness on the left side. Septum is deviated off
to the left side superiorly and to the right side inferiorly. Left
turbinate appears quite large.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably good
morphology. Could be a little bit of slight sclerosis on the head of the
condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space appears a
little bit narrow.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with a
moderate steepness to the articular eminence. Joint space may be a
little bit narrow in some areas. He has really long styloid processes
bilaterally.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. The right
styloid is quite elongated and prominent. He has a calcified node in the
right side of his neck. This calcified node has been present for about
20 years, and he says that the doctors are very much aware of it.

On the cephalometric radiograph, the styloid process on the right side
goes almost all the way down to the hyoid bone. Oropharyngeal airway
actually looks surprisingly good with an airway dimension of about 11
mm. At the soft palate level, the AP dimension is about 8 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Repaired unilateral right cleft lip and palpate

2.  Severe AP maxillary deficiency

3.  Transverse maxillary excess posteriorly

4.  Severe vertical maxillary deficiency

5.  Mandibular AP deficiency (but not recommended for treatment)

6.  Missing maxillary four incisors, left first bicuspid, and all four
    third molars

7.  Severe Class III occlusal relationship

8.  Hypernasal speech

9.  Inefficient pharyngeal flap

10. Nasal deformity

11. Oronasal fistula

12. Absence of alveolar bone, anterior maxilla

13. Overlay denture that has functioned very well


Recommended Treatment

1.  Maintain current functioning prosthesis versus having a new one made
    so that he has a backup

2.  Surgery

    A.  Close oronasal fistula

    B.  Bone graft to anterior maxilla

    C.  Placement of osseointegrated implants

3.  Placement of new prosthetic device
