<PERSON> 03/26/2008

<PERSON> is 54 years old. Referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 2453 E. 11th
Street, <LOCATION>, TX 79761. <PERSON> has high blood pressure. He takes the

1.  Lisinopril/HCTZ 20/12.5 x2.

2.  Nifedical XL 60 mg x2.

<PERSON> has only been aware of having a problem with his jaw during the
last 2 to 3 years and only began paying much attention to it during the

1.  Lower jaw shifting off towards the right side.

2.  Crossbite has developed.

3.  Teeth do not fit together very well.

4.  Pain in the left jaw joint.

<PERSON> has no problems with headaches, but he does get pain in the left
TMJ at about a level of 7, average daily pain can reach a level of 7.
Jaw function is at 4, diet at 0, disability at 2. He has no problems
with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. His left knee will
bother him occasionally, but otherwise his joints are in good condition.
He is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and sometimes during
the day as well.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. The upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth
lip relationship is about minus 3 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much
on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 3.5 mm
to the right, and chin is about 8 to 9 mm to the right. The left side of
the face is somewhat elongated, probably about 4 to 5 mm. In profile
view, <PERSON> has good facial balance. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his
lower teeth back to the second molars. A lot of wear is present from his
bruxing. He has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he is missing
the maxillary right second bicuspid replaced with a bridge. He may be
missing a bicuspid on the opposite side as well. He has basically a
Class I cuspid on the right side and a full Class III cuspid on the left
side. He has a total buccal crossbite on the right side and a non-buccal
relationship on the left side. He has about 0.5 mm of anterior open
bite. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. The uvula is moderately
elongated. Intranasally, he appears to have a good airway, although the
septum seems to be deviated a little bit off towards the right side with
a spur off to the left side at the base of the nose. Turbinates appear
moderate in size. He does have moderate snoring, but is not aware of
having any nasal airway obstruction. He has no sleep apnea issues.
Maximal opening is 60 mm, but it deviates off towards to the left side
probably about 4 mm or so. Excursion movement to the right was 2 mm, to
the left about 6 mm. The right TMJ functions smoothly. Left TMJ has some
fine crepitus noises. No tenderness to palpation around the head and
neck area.

Based on clinical and radiographic analyses, <PERSON>’s diagnoses are as

1.  Left mandibular condylar osteochondroma.

2.  Left temporal bone probable osteochondroma, involving predominately
    the glenoid fossa area.

3.  Class III occlusion on left side.

4.  Mandible deviated to the right side 3.5 mm at the incisors, with the
    chin 8 to 9 mm to the right.

5.  Cross bite on the right side.

6.  Crepitus noises in left TMJ with function.

7.  Left TMJ pain.

8.  History of clenching and bruxism.


1.  Resection and removal of left mandibular condylar osteochondroma.

2.  Resection and removal of left temporal osteochondroma.

3.  Reconstruct left <LOCATION> with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.

4.  Fat graft to left TMJ area (harvest from abdomen).

5.  Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy.

6.  Application of arch bars.
