<LOCATION> (<PERSON>) RODRIGUEZ 10-22-04

Tony is 12 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, McPherson St.,
<LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.

Patient History

When <PERSON> was about a week old, he developed a staph infection in the
right jaw area and apparently ended up with an ankylosis. It was noted
about six months later that his face was becoming asymmetric with
subsequent growth with the right side not developing as well as the left
side. He had a CAT scan, and it showed that he had an ankylosis on the
right side. Dr. <PERSON> in <LOCATION> performed surgery on <PERSON>
when he was 4 years old. They apparently did a resection of part of the
lower jaw on the right side and then took two rib grafts to reconstruct
it. Then on the right side of <PERSON>’s jaw, he started to grow outward on
the right side and may have gotten some elongated as well. This was at
the age of 9. At the age of 9, reconstruction was attempted on the right
joint. Apparently they did quite extensive work, and, in fact, they
dissected out the entire facial nerve and all five branches before they
went into the joint area. They used pig cartilage to try to prevent the
ankylosis. However, within a few months, he was re-ankylosed again with
decreased opening. He does have some loss of facial nerve function at
this time with inability to elevate the right eyebrow. His smile is a
little asymmetric, but most of that has recovered. He apparently doesn’t
have any significant fifth cranial nerve deficit.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and
upper third face. Has asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip
length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 to 6
mm. Nasal tip is deviated just a little bit to the right side probably
about 2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.
Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 4 mm off to the right side,
and chin is probably about 8 to 10 mm off to the right side. In the chin
area on the right side, the parasymphysis area is probably 3 or 4 mm
higher than the left side and back at the angle area is probably 10 to
12 mm higher than the left side.

Transversely, there is more fullness on the right side of the face than
the left side by probably 4 to 6 mm.

In profile view, he actually has fairly good balance between the upper
lips, cheeks, and nose. Could be just slightly AP deficient by maybe a
couple of millimeters. <PERSON> is AP deficiency by probably about 15 mm.

Intraorally, appears to have most of his teeth back through the first
molars erupted in. Has really small upper lateral incisors with the
right one being smaller than the left side but likely has a tooth-size
discrepancy. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship by probably 6 mm
on the right side and on the left side has a Class III cuspid
relationship by probably about 3 to 4 mm. Has about a 3-mm anterior deep
bite relationship. Tendency toward buccal crossbite on the left side and
is okay on the right side, but his lower teeth are significantly tipped
in. Significant transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side
being about 4 or 5 mm elevated compared to the left side. Maximal
incisal opening is about 2 mm. Excursive movement to the right may be 2
mm and to the left 0. Turbinates are moderately hyperplastic.

Radiographic Evaluation

Tony is developing all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has
developing third molars. The second molars are unerupted at this time,
but he has developing third molars in the lower arch and difficult to
tell if there are any in the upper arch just yet. Appears to have a
couple of screws free floating down in the soft tissues below the right
angle area. Left joint is a little hard to see but looks reasonably
normal on that side. On the right side, he has a huge mass of ankylosis
that extends back onto the mastoid area. On this radiograph, the extent
of ankylosis measures about 37 mm in anteroposterior width. There is a
little bit of a coronoid process but not much. Left side appears
somewhat cloudy compared to the right side. <LOCATION> appear a little
bit enlarged particularly on the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit flattened
anteriorly and appears to be decreased anterior joint space. Increased
posterior joint space by probably a couple of millimeters, so the
condyle was actually sitting forward in the fossa.

Right TMJ shows a mass of bony ankylosis that includes the mastoid on
forward on this radiograph. The transverse dimension of the ankylosis is
probably about 35 mm. Essentially no fossa area present. The mass of
heterotopic bone present measures about 38 x 30 mm. Again, two screws
are seen free floating below the inferior border of the mandible.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the inferior border of the
mandible on the right side is probably 7 to 8 mm higher than the left
side at the posterior aspect and in the first molar area is about 10 or
11 mm difference. Has two occlusal plane levels and has a moderately
high occlusal plane angle. Lower anterior teeth are over-angulated. Has
a decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 4 mm at the base of the tongue
and probably 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Right TMJ severe, massive heterotopic bone formation and ankylosis

2.  Severe jaw and masticatory dysfunction

3.  Significant facial asymmetry

4.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 4 to
    5 mm higher than the left side

5.  Class II occlusion on the right side and Class III end-on occlusion
    on the left side

6.  Incisal opening less than 2 mm

7.  Severe jaw and masticatory dysfunction

8.  Buccal crossbite tendency on the left side

9.  Hypo-eruption of teeth in the maxilla and mandible on the right side

10. Small maxillary lateral incisors creating a probable tooth-size
    discrepancy

11. Overangulation of lower incisors

12. Lingual inclination of right posterior teeth

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Place appliances in the upper arch

    B.  Place appliances in the lower arch as best as possible. Will
        have to use bonded brackets

2.  Surgery, Stage I

    A.  Right TMJ removal of large heterotopic bone mass (35 x 25 x
        20 mm) and extensive debridement

    B.  Advancement and reconstruction of the right TMJ area and
        mandible with a TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis including
        creating an open bite on the right side of probably 6 to 8 mm

    C.  Fat graft to right TMJ (harvested from buttock)

3.  Orthodontics, Stage I

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Extrude teeth on the right side
        to help level the occlusion and re-establish improved facial
        symmetry

    C.  Finish and retain

4.  Orthodontics, Stage II

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch

5.  Surgery, Stage II (at age 17 to 18 if necessary)

    A.  Maxillary osteotomies to transversely level and expand the
        maxilla if necessary

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance and
        counterclockwise rotate the mandible and establish good
        occlusion

    C.  Removal of impacted third molars

    D.  Any other auxillary procedures that may be necessary at that
        time

6.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
