LIDRIA ROMERO 07-21-03

Liddy is 22 years old and referred by <PERSON>. <PERSON> and <PERSON>, 206
<PERSON>, <LOCATION>, TX 78539.

Patient Concerns

1.  Shooting pains through the ears

2.  Pain in the jaw joints

3.  Pain in the jaw muscles

4.  Headaches

5.  Lower jaw becoming more retruded and bite changing

6.  Popping in the jaw joint

7.  Noise in the ear when opening the jaws

8.  Difficulties eating and chewing

9.  Tiredness in the jaws if chewing for any significant length of time

10. Cannot sustain opening of the jaw without causing significant pain
    and discomfort

Patient History

She has been evaluated by an ENT doctor, who feels that there are no
problems with the sinuses, ears, and nasal areas and that it is related
to the jaw joints. <PERSON> does have a history of getting anterior
dislocation of the condyles. She had a little bit of difficulty during
the MRI holding her mouth open and feels she couldn’t sustain the
opening or achieve the opening that she normally can. She has had
problems in the past with open lock situation that used to occur more
frequently than it does now.

<PERSON>’s problems began when she was about 14 years of age. She had
orthodontics for about two years beginning in the fourth grade and then
the second stage was done at age 14 for about two years. She has been
about six or seven years out of ortho. She was having some TMJ problems
and symptoms when she started her second round of orthodontics and they
thought that might help her.

She gets headaches about two times a week, and usually they are in the
mornings in the temporal area at about a level of 5. She rates her TMJ
pain at 8, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 3, diet at 6, and
disability at 5. She gets fairly significant earaches that come and go,
and they can last her about five minutes. They occur about once every
two weeks. She does get tinnitus about three times a week, and it is
usually there when she wakes up in the morning. She has no problems with
vertigo or hearing loss. She has had physical therapy for the TMJ
condition. She also has had massages to help with the situation. She has
some problems with the vertebrae in her neck and her back to some
extent. She has some problems with her knees, but she is a runner. She
is aware of clenching and bruxism at night and sometimes during the day.

Current Medications

1.  Motrin for headaches

2.  Allegra for her sinuses

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, she has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and
upper third face. Upper lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip
relationship is 3 mm. Nasal tip is off to the right side about 2 mm.
Maxillary dental midline is off to the right 1 mm as is the mandibular
dental midline. <PERSON> may be about 3 to 4 mm off to the right side.

In profile view, she has fairly good vertical facial balance. Upper lip
may be just slightly retruded by maybe 2 to 3 mm. <PERSON> is retruded by
about 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle
is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids and maxillary
first bicuspids. Some very mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She has
good attached gingiva around the anterior teeth. In centric relation,
she has a slight Class II end-on occlusion being about 2 mm Class II.
She has an overjet of about 2 mm. Midlines remain fairly well aligned in
centric relation. Transversely, the right cuspid is actually 1 mm to 1.5
mm lower than the left cuspid. In the lower arch, the right cuspid may
be down about 1 mm compared to the left side. In the lower arch, the
right cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid, but the upper
arch seems fairly symmetrical. She has a 2-mm overbite relationship.

Intranasally, she appears to have a good airway. <LOCATION> are just
moderately enlarged. <LOCATION> may have some slight deviation but not
significant. She has significantly hypertrophied tonsils. She gets sore
throats fairly frequently and wakes up with them a lot.

To palpation, she has moderate tenderness over the temporalis,
masseters, styloid areas, SCMs, shoulders, and high moderate tenderness
of the TMJs. She has mild tenderness over the medial pterygoids and
posterior neck area.

On opening and closing, she had an occasional click in the joints but
not consistent enough to determine the level of opening and closing
clicks. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm but only to about 18 mm where
she felt comfortable. Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each
direction. <PERSON> has to be very careful on yawning because she can
dislocate her condyles.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first
bicuspids. Sinuses appear clear. <LOCATION> appear just moderate in
size. <PERSON> appear somewhat flattened anteriorly particularly on the
right side. I see no other pathology.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the mandible is postured forward in the
fossa. Some anterior beaking is present. Appears to be loss of vertical
height of the condyle. Distance from sigmoid notch to the top of the
condyle appears quite short. Articular eminence is fairly steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite wide
anteroposteriorly. Decreased anterior joint space. Degenerative changes
present on the condylar head. Translation is good in both joints.

In the open views, the flattening of the right condylar head anterior
anterior beaking is quite evident.

Cephalometrically, she has a Class II skeletal relationship. Tonsils are
fairly large, but oropharyngeal airway also looks very good. Appears to
have a high occlusal plane and a skeletal Class II and occlusal Class II
relationship. She has a moderate-sized adenoid mass in the nasopharynx
area.

<PERSON> had a TMJ workup by Dr. <PERSON> on 05/01/95, and this
showed she had some soreness in the left masseter muscle and a little
bit of an earache problem but no TMJ symptoms. Photographs from 03/30/92
show that she had the same basic facial morphology that she current
does. Had some significant crowding problems, thus, the reason for the
extractions. There are even earlier photographs from 05/21/91 and from
06/05/90 that show that she has been maintaining the same profile. The
earliest x-rays are from 12/06/89 that again show that she has
maintained the same basic profile. Earlier Panorexes from 04/08/92 and
05/12/93 show the condyles appear pretty good. In one of the views,
05/12/93, it appears that she may have been getting some condylar
changes at that time but difficult to say. An x-ray from 09/03/93 shows
that she definitely has some flattening of the right condyle, although
the left one still looks pretty good. Cephalometrically, she may have
had a little bit of Class II change but not too significant. Her adenoid
tissue used to be really huge, but part of the adenoid tissue has
already undergone atrophy, although there is still some present, which
is unusual at this age.

I gave <PERSON> three names of orthodontists in <LOCATION>. They are Dr.
<PERSON>, Indiana University Department of Orthodontics, 1121 W.
<LOCATION>, <LOCATION>, IN 46202; Dr. <PERSON>, 7750 <PERSON>.,
<LOCATION>, IN 46227; and Dr. <PERSON>, 8140 Knue Road, #115,
<LOCATION>, IN 46250.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  <LOCATION> idiopathic condylar resorption with displaced
    nonreducing discs

2.  AP mandibular deficiency

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

4.  Slight AP maxillary deficiency

5.  Class II end-on occlusion

6.  Headaches

7.  TMJ pain

8.  Myofascial pain

9.  Earaches

10. Tinnitus

11. Nocturnal clenching and bruxism

12. Missing all four first bicuspids and third molars removed for
    previous orthodontic reasons

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch

2.  Surgery

    A.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction

    C.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction and downgraft the posterior aspect

    D.  Consider small augmentation genioplasty

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

I gave <PERSON> a prescription for Klonopin 0.5 mg, disp. 30 tablets, 1
tablet q.h.s., refill x 3.
