<PERSON> is 31 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

Patient History


1.  At the age of 2, a tumor was removed blocking the right eardrum

2.  Tonsils and adenoids removed

3.  <LOCATION> and sinus surgery

4.  Hole in left eardrum repaired with a graft

Julie is in good health.

Medication wise, she takes birth control pills, and she takes Imitrex
when she gets migraine headaches.

Julie is not aware of when her jaw problems began. It has only been
about a month ago that her dentist identified that she had a click in

She has had no specific treatment for her jaws.

She has no known allergies. She can’t wear cheap earrings. She is not
aware of any problems with clenching or bruxing in the day rule out
night. She gets headaches two to three times a week that she rates about
a level of 4 that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas.
Her migraines she has one or two times per month, and they usually
register about a level of 8. She rates TMJ pain at 0, overall pain at 4,
jaw function and diet at 0, and disability at 2. The disability is
associated predominantly with the migraine headaches that she
periodically gets.

Patient Concerns

1.  Teeth and jaws are not properly aligned

2.  Pop in the jaw joints

3.  Headaches which she has had all of her life

4.  Discomfort in the cheeks

5.  Discomfort in the right temple area

Medications

1.  Birth control pills

2.  Imitrex

3.  Excedrin, Aleve, etc., for headache control

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
She has prominent masseter muscles and has a low mandibular plane angle
facial morphology. Nasal dorsum is a little bit broad, and she has a
hump in the mid dorsum part. The lower alar cartilages are somewhat
wide. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship
is 5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and <PERSON> are all pretty much on
the facial midline.

In profile view, she has a little bit of fullness in the upper lip area
down by the incisor aspect. Seems to have fairly good projection of the
subnasale. The nasal dorsal prominence is more obvious. <PERSON> appears AP
deficient by perhaps 6 to 8 mm. Chin-neckline is short, and
chin-neckline is moderately well-defined. If she <PERSON> postures her
mandible forward, it does improve the facial balance some. <PERSON> still
looks a little bit AP deficient with her mandible postured forward into
an end-on incisor relationship.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. She has some large lingual tori bilaterally. She has some mild
crowding, lower anterior arch. There is a slightly accentuated curve of
occlusion in the lower arch but not too bad. In the upper arch, she has
all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a reverse curve
of Spee in the upper arch. She is a little bit Class II end-on occlusion
being a little bit greater on the left side than the right side with the
right side being probably 3 mm Class II and the left side being probably
2 mm Class II. She has an anterior deep bite of probably about 6 mm.
<LOCATION>, the occlusal plane appears fairly level. Transversely, the
arches look fairly symmetrical.

Intranasally, she has had previous complete turbinectomies performed
with a little bit of turbinate remaining on the left side way
posteriorly. She has had previous septal surgery with evidence of that
surgery. Airway looks good and wide open. She has been skiing and has
noticed no problems with the cold air and breathing since her
turbinectomies and nasal septoplasty.

Julie has had some temporary buildups of her crowns on the maxillary
left central and lateral incisors.

TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly, except on the left side, if
she opens really widely, there is a definite pop on opening and closing
that appears to be at about the same level at about 40 mm. The closing
click is at about the same level. It may be just the condyle popping out
over the articular eminence at that point. To palpation, she has about a
level of 1 tenderness over the right temporalis muscle but all other
areas are apparently free of discomfort and pain with palpation. Maximum
incisal opening is about 51 mm and about 41 mm with reasonable comfort.
Excursive movement to the right is about 7 mm and to the left about 8
mm.

She had her turbinectomies and nasal septoplasty done in <LOCATION> by an
otolaryngologist.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that both maxillary sinuses appear fairly clear except
there is a little bit more cloudiness on the left one. She is missing
all four third molars. Maxillary left central incisor has a root canal,
and the crowns are built up on that tooth as well as the adjacent left
lateral incisor. <PERSON> look a little flattened anteriorly and appear
to have some anterior beaking present.

Waters view shows that the nasal airway is wide open. Septum is a little
bit deviated at the very top part of it off toward the left side. Left
sinus appears a little bit more opacified than the right side, but there
is not too much difference.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some superior peaking of the
condyle and flattening of the anterior head of the condyle. <PERSON>,
however, appears to be fairly well balanced and positioned in the fossa.
Articular disc could possibly be a little bit vertically oriented in the
right joint and could possibly be acting as a wedge pushing the condyle
posteriorly.

Left TMJ has significant flattening on the anterior head of the condyle,
and a little bit of anterior beaking may be present. Vertical joint
space appears may be decreased in dimension. Articular eminence is
moderately steep as it is on the opposite side. Disc may be vertically
oriented.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles, but the left one
has a little bit more forward translation as compared to the left one
and may be part of the reason for the click in that joint.

Cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a slight Class II skeletal
relationship. Occlusal plane may be just a little bit high but difficult
to tell. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good. Angles of the mandible
appear quite prominent. Anterior deep bite is seen, and the Class II
end-on occlusion is appreciated. Oropharyngeal airway appears very good
except down by the hyoid bone there is a slightly dimension of probably
about 6 mm. At the soft palate level, the AP dimension is about 18 mm
and at the base of the tongue is about 10 mm. Appears to be a little bit
of maxillary prominence and a little bit of AP chin deficiency.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc dislocation

2.  Maxillary AP hyperplasia

3.  Slight vertical maxillary hyperplasia

4.  AP mandibular hypoplasia

5.  AP microgenia

6.  Class II end-on occlusion with division II relationship in the
    incisors

7.  Reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch

8.  Mild crowding, lower anterior teeth

9.  Tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 1 to 2 mm

10. Slight overangulation of the lower incisors

11. Anterior deep bite

12. Headaches

13. Myofascial pain

14. External nasal deformity

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Try to intrude the maxillary
        central incisors 1 to 2 mm if possible. Be careful of the left
        maxillary central incisor as it possibly could be ankylosed. If
        ankylosis is realized on that tooth, then align and level the

  Segment 1: Left cuspid through second molar

  Segment 2: Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor

  Segment 3: Right cuspid through right second molar

  Place a downward step in the arch wire to align the four incisors at
  the lower occlusal plane level. This will involve extruding the
  maxillary lateral incisors slightly. Keep the lateral incisor roots
  tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally

B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing
    1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to help compensate for the tooth-size
    discrepancy

2.  Surgery

    A.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly
        and posteriorly

    C.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible
        into occlusion

    D.  Augmentation genioplasty of approximately 5 mm

    E.  External rhinoplasty

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
