<PERSON>

<LOCATION> is 13 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.
<PERSON> believes her jaw joint problems began about 1-1/2 years ago of
apparently has gotten worse in the past five months ago. She began her
orthodontic treatment in December of 2004.


1.  Growth hormone 0.65 units.

2.  Synthroid 0.125 mg

She recently took a week of steroids and this helped decrease her pain.


1.  Jaw and jaw joint pain.

2.  Teeth and jaws do not fit together properly.

3.  Difficulties eating and chewing particularly on the right side.

4.  Cannot sleep on the right side as it tends to wake her up.

5.  Decreased jaw opening.

6.  Right-sided earaches.

She does get earaches on the right side but no tinnitus, vertigo or
hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is allergic to dust. She
cannot wear cheap earrings. She has been diagnosed with <PERSON>
syndrome. She is not too sure if she clenches or bruxes. She has no
problems with headaches. She rates her TMJ which is predominately in the
right side at a level of 4 but it easily escalates up to a level of 7.
Her average daily pain is about a level of 5. Jaw function is at 5, diet
with chewing is 1 on the left side and 6 on the right side. Disability
she rates at a level of 3.

In frontal view, <LOCATION> has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is 3
mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular
dental midline is off to the right side almost 2 mm. <PERSON> may be about 3
mm off to the right side. In profile view she has fairly good balance
between the upper lip, cheeks and nose. The chin appears a little bit
retruded by maybe 4 to 5 mm. <PERSON> neckline is fairly well defined though
a little bit short. The upper could be retruded 2 to 3 mm perhaps.
Intraorally, <LOCATION> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars present. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the
lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back
through the second molars present. She has a Class II end-on occlusion 4
mm on the left and probably 3 mm on the right side. <PERSON> appears
relatively healthy. She does have tonsils present with crypts in them
and some debris present. However, they are relatively normal in size.
The uvula is moderately enlarged. The soft palate appears relatively
normal and faucial pillars are relatively normal. Intranasally, the
septum looks fairly straight. The turbinates are fairly large and may
create some airway obstruction. She is a predominately mouth breather at
night when she sleeps. During the day, however, she can breathe better
through her nose than she can at night. This is probably moderate nasal
airway obstruction. The columella is moderately wide. The nostrils are
relatively normal in size. She gives no history of snoring, daytime
somnolence or sleep apnea syndromes.

<PERSON> does have dust allergy problems. She had some nasal spray for
awhile but this did not seem to make much difference. <PERSON> also has
been treated by Dr. Honor <PERSON> for tongue thrush. <PERSON> has not
actually had treatment by Dr. <PERSON> yet but Dr. <PERSON> has
evaluated <LOCATION> and would like to treat her. To palpation, she has some
mild tenderness over the right styloid and moderate tenderness over the
right TMJ but no tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal
opening is 40 mm. She can open about 32 mm without significant
discomfort. Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, left 6 mm. When she
opens, she deviates about 3 mm off to the right side. Joints seem to
function relatively smoothly. Model analysis shows that she has a slight
tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of probably about 2
mm. Models occlude together reasonably well with the second molar being
up and out of occlusion, however. She has a slight Class II end-on
cuspid relationship. Transverse plane is canted slightly with the right
side about 1 to 1.5 mm higher than the left side.


Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars that are impacted and
little to no room for them to erupt in. The sinuses appear relatively
clear. Difficult to evaluate the condyles.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle may have a little bit of beaking
anteriorly but not too significant. There appears to be fairly good
joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there
is fairly good translation.

Right TMJ shows condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa. There is
flattening on the anterior head and anterior beaking present. Articular
eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is restricted
translation compared to the other side as the condyle does not quite
approximate the inferior aspect of the articular eminence.

Waters view shows that the turbinates are quite large but the sinuses
appear relatively clear.

Lateral cephalogram shows that she has a slight skeletal Class II
occlusal relationship. She has tendency to develop an open bite. The
inferior borders of the mandible line up fairly well but there is
vertical discrepancy in the posterior segments in the cuspids
posteriorly with one side being vertically higher than the opposite
side. There is a decreased oropharyngeal airway. There is space between
the soft palate and the posterior pharyngeal wall.



1.  MRI evaluation showed that she has a left TMJ articular disc
    dislocation with reduction but adhesions of the disc to the
    fossa/eminence.

2.  TMJ arthritis, (right side greater than left side) with disc
    dislocation, nonreducing but adhesions of the disc to the
    fossa/eminence.

<PERSON> Page 3


1.  <PERSON> syndrome.

2.  <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc dislocations being worse
    on the right side as compared to the left

3.  AP mandibular deficiency.

4.  Class II end-on occlusion.

5.  TMJ pain.

6.  Earaches.

7.  Impacted third molars x 4.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Continue to align mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the occlusion.

    c.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4.

3.  Post surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
