<PERSON> 09-26-03

Lynne is 42 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

Patient Concerns

1.  Earaches, right ear

2.  Swishing, “sea shell” sounds, heartbeat sounds in the left ear. She
    can’t make this noise unless I stopped as she repositioned her head
    in a certain way or places a pillow under her neck in a certain way

3.  Headaches

4.  Pain in the right jaw joint

5.  Difficulty opening the mouth

6.  Difficulty eating and chewing

7.  Inability to sleep at night secondary to pain

8.  Pain down through the jaws and into the neck

9.  Clicking and popping in the jaw joints

Patient History

<PERSON>’s problems began about 2-1/2 years ago. She fell ice skating and
hit her head on the ice sustaining a concussion. She had a CT scan of
her head taken at that time, and it showed no intracranial bleeding. She
continued to have some significant pain in her neck, and so an MRI was
taken, and then she had some steroid injections into her neck
approximately two weeks or so after the fall, and this did help her
fairly significantly in reference to her neck problems, although she
states she still has some carpal tunnel symptoms bilaterally. During the
next few months is when she realized that she was having some problems
with her jaws or her ears. She did seek help from ENT doctors first, and
she has been to see two different doctors. Within a few months, she went
into to see Dr. <PERSON>. Dr. <PERSON> make three attempts to make a
splint for <PERSON>, but these all failed as it could not maintain a proper
relationship between the jaws and the splint, and it did not help with
her pain levels. She has had one subsequent splint that Dr. <PERSON> has
recently made for her, although she has only worn this for about 5 days,
and she feels that this is helping her some. She has had massage
treatment, but this has not helped her, and she has also had hot and
cold therapy, which has not been successful either. One of the ENT
doctors placed her on <LOCATION> and Dyazide. The <LOCATION> helped her
sleep well, but the Dyazide did not help her. One of the doctors
diagnosed her as having tinnitus, but she doesn’t have ringing in her
ears. She takes Darvocet occasionally and currently takes <LOCATION> only
occasionally as well. She does get right earaches but has no tinnitus,
no vertigo, but does have some hearing loss. She is aware of nocturnal
clenching. She also clenches during the daytime. She does feel a little
bit better if she keeps her jaws apart and postures forward some as it
does take some of the stress off of her joints. Other joints that bother
her include her neck in the upper part and her right thumb. <PERSON> gets
headaches about two times per week, and they occur predominantly in the
frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 7 on the
average. She may have some food allergies as she is aware of a certain
cheese that gives her significant headache problems. She rates her TMJ
pain at 8, overall pain on an average day at 8, jaw function at 9, diet
at 4, and disability at 4. <PERSON> has had her orthodontic braces on only
for two weeks now.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip
length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm.
Maxillary and mandibular midlines are pretty much on the facial midline.
<PERSON> may be just 1 to 2 mm off to the left side.

In profile view, she has good facial balance. Chin-neckline has a good
length, and chin-neck angle is well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars
present. She has a crown on the mandibular left first molar. There is
some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached
gingiva around the lower anterior teeth.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second
molars. She has appliances on only the upper teeth at this time. She has
basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has an anterior
deep-bite of about 3 to 4 mm. <PERSON> is clear. She claims no
problems breathing through her nose.

To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain to palpation over the
right TMJ but no other pain to palpation around the head and neck area.
Joints seem to function fairly smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. Root canal in the
mandibular left first molar with a crown on it and root canal in the
maxillary right first molar. Sinuses look relatively clear. <LOCATION>
look relatively normal in size. Septum appears straight. <PERSON> appear
somewhat large and almost too large for the fossas. No other significant
pathology noted.

Waters view shows that she has moderate-size turbinates, but it appears
that there is some airway there. Sinuses appear relatively clear.
Mandible on the left side may be just slightly short vertically compared
to the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat
posteriorly positioned in the fossa. She has very steep articular
eminences. It is possible that the articular discs may be vertically
oriented within the joint. Posterior joint space does seem somewhat
decreased.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that actually seems to show fairly
good space around the condyle. The condyle appears a little bit more
normal in size. Articular eminence is moderately steep although maybe
not quite as steep as the opposite side. Difficult to tell if the space
is adequate to support the disc or not.

On opening, there is moderately good translation of both the condyles.
It appears there is a slightly decreased joint space on the right side
between the condyle and articular eminence and also a little bit
decreased on the left side as well.

Cephalometrically, she is skeletal Class I. Oropharyngeal airway appears
a little bit decreased, but she gives no history of snoring or other
airway problems.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction

2.  Right TMJ arthritis with probable articular disc reduction, but the
    disc is much more difficult to identify on this side indicative of
    possible medial displacement as well (no coronal views were
    available)

3.  Relative mandibular hyperplasia

4.  Headaches

5.  TMJ pain

6.  Anterior deep bite

7.  Mild crowding, lower anterior arch

8.  Right-sided earaches

9.  History of nocturnal and daytime clenching

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch

2.  Surgery

    A.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal osteotomies to maintain
        occlusion and allow the creation of space within the joint to
        accommodate the disc

    C.  If right TMJ disc is nonsalvageable, consider sternoclavicular
        disc graft to aid in reconstructing the joint.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
