<PERSON> 07/16/2007

Emily is 14 years and 9 months old. She is referred by Dr. <PERSON> and Dr. <PERSON>. <PERSON> has also been treated by Dr. <PERSON>, 44836th Ave. <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>. 103, <PERSON>, OK 73072.

Emily's TMJ problems began when she was about 12 years of age. She was
hurt in a cheerleading accident where someone being held up fell and
landed on her head. Since that time she has had significant TMJ issues.
Her problems got worse and in March 2006 she began splint therapy with
Dr. <PERSON> in a forward positioning splint. She wore this until November
2006 when she did not seem to be improving at all. Initially the splints
did seem to help her. She had physical therapy from November 2006 to
March of 2007. The physical therapy did help her back and neck some but
did not help the TMJ issues. She has had no other treatment.


1.  Clicking and popping of the jaw joints.

2.  The jaws lock.

3.  Headaches.

4.  Neck pain.

5.  Upper back pain.

She gets occasional earaches but no tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.
No other joints bother her. She rates her TMJ at 4, average daily pain
at 6, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 2. She gets daily
headaches that occur at about a level of 7 in the right temporal
posterior head area and down the left frontal temporal and posterior
head area. She usually has daily pain in the morning but then
subsequently turns into headaches. In the summer of 2006 she did develop
viral spinal meningitis. She seems to have no residual effects
associated with the viral spinal meningitis. Other than the TMJ issues
it appears that <PERSON> is in good health.

In frontal view <PERSON> appears to have reasonably good facial symmetry
and balance. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip
relationship is about 2.5 to 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular
dental midline and chin are all fairly reasonably well aligned. In
profile view she has fairly good balance between the upper lip, cheeks
and nose. She may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency. She is
about 10 to 12 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is a little bit short and
the chin-neck angle is moderately defined. In the lower arch, <PERSON> has
all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Teeth appear
nicely aligned and leveled. She has a high attached labial frenulum. In
the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.
A little bit of minor crowding around the lateral incisors. She has a
Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally being probably 3 mm
Class II. She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm. Intraorally, the
uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal in length. The faucial
pillars appear somewhat constricted. The turbinates are moderately
enlarged. A little bit of deviation of the septal base off to the right
side. There may be some mild nasal airway obstruction. <PERSON> has no
problems with snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep apnea symptoms. On
opening, she has audible clicks and pops in <LOCATION> and about 30 mm of
opening and closing click is somewhere around 20 mm. Joints are quite
noisy.

<PERSON> 07/16/2007 Page 2

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.
Incisal opening is 48 mm. Excursive movements are 8 mm in each
direction.


Panorex shows the presence of 4 impacted third molars but all the rest
of the teeth erupted and in position. Sinuses look reasonably clear. The
right turbinate appears larger than the left turbinate. The condyles
look relatively normal.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. The bony septum at
least is straight. The turbinates appear fairly large with what appears
to be some constricture of the airway.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of flattening
on the posterior head and a little bit of peaking at the top of the
condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space vertically
appears decreased.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little flattening on the
superior aspect. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears
to be decreased joint space at the posterior aspect of the joint. On
opening there is fairly good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> does have some adenoid
tissue still remaining in the nasopharynx. She has a moderately high
occlusal plane angle. The mandible appears retruded. The maxilla maybe
slightly retruded as well. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at
the soft palate level and 4 to 5 mm at the base of the tongue. Lower
incisors appear slightly overangulated. The upper lateral incisors
appear small so there is probably a tooth size discrepancy. However, we
do not have models today to do that evaluation.


1.  <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc dislocation with late
    reduction.

2.  AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  High occlusal plane angle.

5.  Class II end-on occlusion.

6.  Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of about 3 to 4 mm
    (models not available at the time of evaluation.)

7.  TMJ pain.

8.  Headaches.

9.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

10. Hypertrophied adenoid tissue.

11. Hypertrophied turbinates.

12. Airway obstruction.

<PERSON> 07/16/2007 Page 3


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Open up at least 1 mm of spacing
        around each upper lateral incisor.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth to keep from flaring them any further forward removing
        approximately 2 mm of tooth structure.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction and downgraft it posteriorly.

    d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    e.  Augmentation genioplasty 3 to 4 mm (Medpor implant.)

    f.  Adenoidectomy.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
