<PERSON> 07/14/2006

Daniel is 16-1/2 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>.


1.  Unable to close his mouth properly.

2.  Wearing down of teeth.

3.  <PERSON> and bite are way out of alignment.

4.  Concerned about possible development of future jaw pain.

By history, <PERSON> had orthodontics done from 1998 to 1999 and had a
good bite relationship at that time. He had his wisdom teeth removed in
August of 2005. That is the only surgery he has undergone. On final
completion of his orthodontics his bite apparently was fairly good.
Since that time he has developed significant problems with his jaw
alignment and with his occlusion. <PERSON>'s growth problem began when he
an uncle who had a similar problem. His uncle is his dad's brother and
he had surgery to fix his problem a number of years ago. He also had his
lower jaw that overdeveloped and grew off to one side.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial balance in the middle and
upper third face. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth to lip
relationship is about 3.5 to 4 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty close to
being on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is 4.5 to 5 mm
off to the left side. In fact, the contact between the right central and
lateral incisor almost align with his maxillary midline. Left side of
mandibular ramus is probably a good 6 mm more prominent than the right
side. The chin is probably about 7 to 8 mm off to the left. There is
some deficiency in cheek projection of probably about 3 to 4 mm. He has
a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip appears to be retruded by
probably about 3 to 4 mm. <PERSON> appears to be retruded by maybe about 8
to 10 mm but neckline may be just a little bit short though the
chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. He has a high occlusal plane
angle facial type of morphology. As <PERSON> postures his mandible towards
the right side 5 mm, it improves his facial symmetry except the left
angle of the mandible still considerably more prominent than the right
side by probably 4 mm yet. In the left angle of the mandible, <PERSON> has
some moderate masseteric hyperplasia. When he bites down there is more
muscle fullness and mass on the left side as compared to the right angle
of the mandible. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back through
the second molars present. He has some mild crowding of the lower
anterior arch. In the lower arch the left cuspid may be about 1 mm to 2
mm posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch he has all of his
teeth back through the second molars. <PERSON> has a total crossbite on
the left side and anteriorly. On the right side he has a tendency
towards a crossbite in the lateral incisor, cuspid, first bicuspid but
the second bicuspid molars are not in crossbite. He has an open bite of
about 1 mm anteriorly. He has occlusion primarily on the maxillary
second molar, first and second molar and mandibular second bicuspid and
molars. The uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal though the
soft palate may be slightly elongated. Faucial pillars look relatively
normal. <PERSON> is probably about 3 mm Class III on the left side and
super Class III being about 9 mm to 10 mm Class III on the right side.
Intranasally, turbinates are moderately enlarged. The septum may be a
little bit deviated off towards the right side. There is probably
moderate nasal airway obstruction.

DANIEL SCHOCH 07/14/2006 Page 2

The columella base is wide and the nostrils are quite narrow. Luminal
valves look reasonably good. <PERSON> is not aware of any problems with
snoring, daytime somnolence or any sleep apnea symptoms. To palpation,
he has no tenderness over the head and neck area. Joints seem to
function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 60 mm with
about 5 mm of excursive movement in each direction. Joints seem to
function smoothly. No tenderness around the head and neck area.


Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. It also shows that
the maxillary right second molar is completely out of occlusion. Sinuses
look reasonably clear. Difficult to evaluate the condyles and joints.

Waters view shows the asymmetry in the mandible. Left angle is more
prominent than the right angle. Significant deviation of the nasal
septum with a fairly good size spur going off to the left side of the
nose. Turbinates appear large compared to the available nasal width and
they appear to obliterate most of the nasal airway.

Left TMJ tomogram shows condyle that has some mild arthritic changes.
The joint space looks fairly good. Articular eminence is moderately
steep. There is probably a little bit of anterior beaking present but
difficult to tell on this x-ray.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a decreased
vertical joint space. The posterior joint space looks normal. Articular
eminence is relatively shallow. Condylar head and neck appear elongated
compared to the opposite side. On opening, there is some restricted
translation in both joints, a little bit greater on the left side
compared to the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph reveals a skeletal and occlusal Class
III relationship. Oral pharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good.
Turbinate extends slightly beyond the hard palate by probably 5 to 6 mm.
Maxilla appears AP deficient and the mandible appears prominent
anteroposteriorly although the chin is a little bit weak. There is a
transverse yaw with the maxilla being 2 mm off to the left side. The
mandible is probably 3 to 4 mm off to the left side.


1.  Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia being worse on the right
    side than the left side.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

4.  Mandibular deviated prognathism.

5.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

6.  Super Class III occlusion on the right side and Class III occlusion
    on the left side.

7.  Anterior and left posterior crossbite and on the right side
    crossbite involving the central through the first bicuspid.

8.  Increased transverse prominence of the left mandibular angle.

9.  Nasoseptal spurs.

DANIEL SCHOCH 07/14/2006 Page 3

10. Hypertrophied turbinates.

11. Wide columella.

12. Narrow nostrils.

13. Nasal airway obstruction.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> high condylectomies and repositioning of articular
        disc with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, expand and move the
        anterior aspect superiorly.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in
        a counterclockwise rotation and shifting it to the right onto
        the facial midline.

    d.  AP augmentation genioplasty.

    e.  Partial turbinectomies.

    f.  Nasal septoplasty.

    g.  Reconstruction of columella.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
