<PERSON> 03/26/2008

<PERSON> is 19 years old. Referred by Dr. <PERSON>, <LOCATION>.
Palmas 754-1105, <PERSON>, <LOCATION>, 11000 <PERSON> is good
health with no major medical problems. She has noticed that her lower
jaw is becoming more asymmetric. She had orthodontics from the age of 12
to 14. At the completion of orthodontics, her lower dental midline was
out of alignment slightly at that time. However, it was at 14 when she
noticed her lower jaw began to shift more towards the left side. She has
no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain, etc. Her primary

1.  Jaw line is unaligned.

2.  Teeth do not fit together properly.

3.  Clicking in the jaw joints.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. She
does have asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is about
21 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is zero. Maxillary midline is a
little bit off to the left side about 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline is
6 mm off to the left. <PERSON> is about 10 mm off to the left side. In
profile view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial balance vertically and
anteroposteriorly. She has a good chin neckline. <PERSON> appears to be
retruded about 3 mm and chin may be retruded about 5 mm. Intraorally,
<PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back to the second molars. There
is some minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch. She appears to have
good attached gingiva, although the labial frenulum is attached
relatively high. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back to the
second molars present. She has a Class II cuspid relationship on the
right side by probably at least 2 mm and on the left side she is Class
III by about 2 to 3 mm. She has zero vertical overbite. She has a
crossbite on the right side extending from the left lateral incisor back
to about the first molar, although the first molar itself appears to be
out of crossbite. She has about 0.5 mm of vertical overbite with the
front teeth. Oropharyngeal tissues look fairly healthy. She has some
significant constricture of the fascial pillars. Septum is fairly
straight. <LOCATION> are moderately enlarged, but she states that she
breathes predominantly through her nose when she sleeps. To palpation,
<PERSON> has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal
opening is 55 mm, excursion movements about 6 mm in each direction. On
opening, she has a glitch in the left joint at about 35 mm. On the right
side, she has a pop noise, but I believes it involves the condyle coming
over the articular eminence and not particularly related to a disc
issue.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. Right ramus and condylar neck appear longer and wider as
compared to the opposite side. The left side appears somewhat arthritic.
She appears to have a large pseudocyst in the left condylar head.
Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view shows that she has hair extensions in place. Sinuses appear
relatively clear, although the right one is smaller than the left one.
<LOCATION> appear fairly large and appear to fill most of the available
nasal airway. Bony septum is reasonably straight.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may have a slight anterior
beaking. The condylar head and neck appears a little elongated. There
appears to be decreased joint space. It appears the articular eminence
is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears perhaps a little bit
arthritic. There is a pseudocyst in the head. Joint space appears
somewhat narrow vertically and posteriorly. Articular eminence has a
moderate inclination. On opening, there is good translation of both
condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has what appears to be a
Class I cuspid molar relationship. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks
very narrow with an AP dimension of only about 2 to 3 mm at the soft
palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue.

On additional questioning, <PERSON> does state she gets headaches
about once or twice a week in the temporal areas that can elevate to a
level of 7.


1.  Right mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

2.  Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.

3.  Deviated mandibular prognathism off towards to the left side.

4.  AP maxillary deficiency.

5.  Slight AP mandibular deficiency.

6.  Class III end-on occlusion on the right side. Class II end-on
    occlusion on the left side.

7.  Mandibular midline shifted 6 mm to the left of the facial midline
    and chin shifted 10 mm to the left of the facial midline.

8.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being
    about 2 mm lower than the left side in the first bicuspid area.

9.  Crossbite on the left side.

10. Headaches.

11. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm AP dimension (normal 11 mm).


1.  MRI of left and right TMJ.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Right TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning and
        ligament repair with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
        Mitek anchors.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible
        back onto the facial midline.

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla slightly,
        upright the incisors, and transversely AP level the occlusal
        planes.

    e.  Consider partial reduction turbinectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
