<PERSON> 07/21/2008

<PERSON> is 15 years old. Referred by <PERSON>, DDS, 72 <PERSON>., <LOCATION>, OH 45066. <PERSON> is in good health with no major
medical problems. She takes no medications. Her primary concerns are as

1.  Anterior open bite.

2.  Difficulties biting and chewing some foods.

3.  Difficulties breathing through the nose.

4.  Predominantly a mouth breather particularly at night.

<PERSON> has had previous orthodontics for phase 1 from July 2001 to
November 2002. At the completion of that treatment, her jaws were in
good alignment and she had an anterior vertical overbite. Since that
time, she has developed into a Class II open bite. She has had no other
treatment to date.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION: In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm. The maxillary midline may be off
to the right side by about 1 mm. The mandibular dental midline may be
off to the left side about 1 mm. The chin is fairly close to being on
the midline. <PERSON> has almost 10 mm of lip incompetence. <PERSON> has a
head postured forward and neck position. She has some prominence in
nasal dorsum. She has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4
to 5 mm. <PERSON> is retruded probably about 15 to 18 mm. The chin neckline
is short and chin neck angle is not defined. Back in frontal view, the
right mandibular ramus may be 3 to 4 mm more lateral than the left one.
Intraorally, she has all of her teeth erupted in including her third
molars, although the left one is partially soft tissue impacted, but the
right one is pretty much in. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth
back through the second molars present. She actually has a Class III
cuspid relationship bilaterally being about 1 to 2 mm Class III on the
left side and closer to 5 to 6 mm Class III on the right side. The right
cuspid in the lower arch may be forward 1 to 2 mm. Transversely, the
arch appears somewhat narrow in the bicuspid and first molar area. There
is some significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with the cuspids
blocked labially onto the arch. She appears to have adequate attached
gingiva. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. There
is a slight increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch as well.
<LOCATION>, the upper arch appears fairly symmetric in the cuspid
area. The right cuspid may be about 1 mm lower than the left cuspid. She
has about a 2 mm anterior open bite. Oropharyngeal tissues look
relatively normal. Intranasally, the turbinates are fairly large
particularly on the left side where it appears to be touching the
septum. The nostrils are moderately narrow. Luminal valves may be
moderately constricted. No tenderness to palpation around the head and
neck area. Joints seem to function smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is
about 52 mm. Excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of all of the teeth
with the lower third molars erupting in and the upper ones probably
getting close the erupting in as well. Sinuses look reasonably clear. It
is difficult to evaluate the condyles.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The bony nasal septum is
relatively straight. The turbinates are enlarged particularly in the
left side with what appears to be a significantly constricted nasal
airway.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that a condyle that has reasonably good
morphology. Joint space may be slightly decreased vertically. Articular
eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that may have some flattening on the
posterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to
be decreased vertical and posterior joint space. On opening, there is
fairly good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a high occlusal
plane angle, anterior open bite, elongated anterior mandible, adenoid in
the posterior pharyngeal area with a significantly decreased airway at
the nasal aspect and a somewhat decreased oropharyngeal airway.
Oropharyngeal airway up at the posterior aspect of the nose measures
about 3 to 4 mm adjacent to the adenoid mass. The posterior pharyngeal
wall of the airway measures about 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level and
about 6 to 7 mm at the base of the tongue.


1.  <LOCATION> adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).

2.  AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency, but slightly anterior
    maxillary excess.

5.  High occlusal plane angle.

6.  Class III occlusion on the right side, slight Class III on the left
    side.

7.  Anterior open bite.

8.  Crowding of the lower anterior arch.

9.  Anterior mandibular vertical access and AP microgenia.

10. Malaligned third molars.

11. Hypertrophied turbinates.

12. Nasopharyngeal adenoid hyperplasia.

13. Nasal airway obstruction.

14. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Place a step in the archwire so
          that the 4 incisors are aligned in an elevated occlusal plane
          level compared to the posterior teeth so that these teeth are
          not extruded. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid
          roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Try to expand the bicuspids and
          first molars some. Consider slenderizing the lower anterior
          teeth to keep from flaring them too far forward.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla forward in
          the front and down posteriorly as well as correcting any
          transverse discrepancies that may be present.

    d.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance it
          vertically and decrease the chin.

    e.  Bilateral partial turbinectomies.

    f.  Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.

3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
