VERONICA SHEA 12/12/2011

Veronica is 48 years old, birth date 08/29/1963. She is referred by Dr.
Lang in <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.

<PERSON> believes her jaw joint problems began sometime in her 20s of
year. She has had no other treatment for her jaw or TMJ issues. Currents
symptoms include headaches at a level of 5 that occur predominantly just
in the right frontal area. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily
pain at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 5, disability at 5. She has no
problems with earaches, tinnitus, gets occasional vertigo, but no
hearing loss. Other joints that bother her include her shoulders,
elbows, and she does have a bulging disk in her neck. She is allergic to
PENICILLIN. She has no known allergies to jewelry. She is not aware of
clenching or bruxing. She does have severe snoring, moderate daytime
somnolence, and she has moderate sleep apnea. She breathes predominantly
through her mouth when she sleeps and also breathes a lot through her
mouth during the day as well. She has probably a moderate sleep disorder
as well.


1.  Celexa 20 mg.

2.  Temazepam 20 mg.

She has been taking the Celexa and Temazepam for 19 years. These
medications have significantly decreased and controlled her pain levels.
<PERSON> was diagnosed with fibromyalgia in 1992. She has had her head
tremor or twitching for a long time also.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
There is slight increased prominence on the right side compared to the
left side by probably 3 to 4 mm. Within the past 6 months, she has had
some filler put in around her chin implant which she received the chin
implant in 1982. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is fairly close to
being on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm
to the right and the chin is probably about 3 to 4 mm to the right.
<PERSON> does have a head tremor and this is worsened with caffeine. She
did have some caffeine today which has affected her somewhat.
Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her teeth back through the second
molars present. She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior
arch. She has adequate attached gingiva, although somewhat thin around
the central incisors. She probably has a good 5 to 6 mm of crowding in
the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth
back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on cuspid
relationship bilaterally, being about 3 mm Class II. The maxillary left
lateral incisor is blocked out of the arch slightly. She has just a
slight over jet of about 1 to 2 mm. She does have about 2 mm of vertical
overbite. The maxilla is fairly flat transversely. Oropharyngeal tissues
look healthy and relatively normal, except the fascial pillars appear a
little bit constricted but cannot tell if that was in her relaxed
position or not. There could be some constricture with the fascial
pillars. Could not observe the tonsils. Intranasally, the septum is
deviated significantly off towards the right side anteriorly and the
cartilaginous portion seems to block most of the airway. Nostrils and
columella appear relatively normal. To palpation, she has moderate pain
over the masseter muscles, medial pterygoids, shoulders, right TMJ, and
milder tenderness over the left TMJ. Joints seem to function relatively
smoothly. The maxillary incisal opening is 38 mm, but opening without
pain and discomfort only 13 mm. The excursion movement to the right is
about 10 mm and to the left 3 mm, although it was difficult for her to
perceive how to do those movements easily.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars and she is missing the mandibular right second bicuspid and has
an implant replacement. She has crowns on all of the molar teeth except
for the right first molar. She has root canals on the mandibular left
first molar and on the maxillary left second bicuspid.

Coronal view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards
the right side. The sinuses appear relatively clear. The turbinates
appear fairly large.

Axial view shows that the septum is deviated off towards the right side
and turbinates are enlarged and appear to block a good portion of the
functional airway. The sinus lining on the right side may be slightly
increased in thickness. Also on the floor of the left sinus, there is
some slight increased thickness of the sinus membrane.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that she has had significant resorption of
the articular eminence. The eminence is quite flat. The condylar head
has been resorbed way and is flat and broad in an anteroposterior
dimension. The condyle is functioning beneath the remnants of the
articular eminence. There appears to be bone deposition posterior to the
condyle extending from the posterior fossa wall.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe
resorption. Likewise, the articular eminence has resorbed away the
condyle is functioning forward where the articular eminence used to be
and appears to have formed a new fossa anterior. There is significantly
decreased vertical joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is extremely narrow and
sitting at the lateral aspect of the fossa with a significantly
decreased lateral joint space. It appears in some areas there could be a
bone-on-bone contact. However, in the mid part of the fossa, there is
increased soft tissue thickness in parts of the joint area. The condyle
is very narrow and probably about a third of normal width. The lateral
rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe
resorption, although the head is slightly wider in width. There is a
medial osteophytic extension of the condyle that appears to articulate
in the depth of the fossa. The lateral rim of the fossa curves
inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm. There is significantly decreased vertical
joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a maxilla that
is AP deficient as well as posterior vertically deficient. The
mandibular is significantly AP deficient. She has a high occlusal plane
angle. She appears to have a 2 mm overjet relationship. She has an
oropharyngeal airway of less than 2 mm at the soft palate level and
probably about 4 mm at the base of the tongue. She has probably a
Silastic chin implant in place that augments the chin probably about 8
mm. She has a high occlusal plane angulation.


1.  <LOCATION> severe arthritis compatible with rheumatoid arthritis.

2.  Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.

3.  Mandibular AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.

4.  Class II end-on occlusion.

5.  High occlusal plane angle of 31 degrees (normal equals 8 degrees).

6.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm
    (normal AP dimension 11 mm).

7.  Moderate crowding of the mandibular anterior arch.

8.  Mild crowding of maxillary anterior arch.

9.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

10. Nasal septal deviation..

11. TMJ pain.

12. Headaches.

13. Myofascial pain.

14. Periodontal defect lower anterior arch.

15. Sleep apnea.

16. Oversized Silastic chin implant.


1. Periodontal evaluation and grafting of lower anterior arch.

2. Presurgical orthodontics.

a. Align and level maxillary arch.

b. Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth
removing at least 3 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the lower
incisors too far forward. Consider some expansion of the mandibular

  arch.

2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3. Surgery.

a. <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a
counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.

b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies advance the maxilla in a
counterclockwise direction.

<LOCATION> coronoidotomies.

d. <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

e. Bilateral partial turbinectomies.

<PERSON> septoplasty.

g. Remove excessively large Silastic chin implant.

h. Place small Medpor chin implant.

4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
