MELODY SHIPLEY 02-17-03

Melody is 16 years old and referred by <PERSON>, DDS, 1601 S.
Blvd., <PERSON>, OK 73013.

Patient History

At birth, <PERSON> had a central line that was placed and then later on
had some plastic closure to correct the scar. <PERSON> was premature at
birth, approximately six weeks, and had some airway distress problems.
When <PERSON> was four years old, she fell and hit her chin and had about
four or five stitches in her chin area. She did see Dr. <PERSON>.
At that time, she was locking and popping. Dr. <PERSON> made a splint for
her. They then moved to <LOCATION> and saw a TMJ specialist there, who made
a different kind of splint. Dr. <PERSON> has had <PERSON> in orthodontic
appliances since January 29, 2002. <PERSON> has had previous splint
therapy by Dr. <PERSON> and had a splint made by the TMJ specialist in
<LOCATION> but lost it within the first month and never went back. She saw
an orthodontist in <LOCATION> for two appointments but never followed
through with treatment. Dr. <PERSON> also has made a splint for <PERSON>, and
then, of course, she is under orthodontic treatment with Dr. <PERSON>
currently.

She has had two oral surgery consultations already, one with Dr. <PERSON>. Dr. <PERSON> has recommended apparently doing TMJ surgery to
put the disc back in place with a Mitek anchor and coming back six
months later and doing some jaw surgery. Dr. <PERSON> suggested doing only
jaw surgery and ignoring the joints. They are here for a third opinion.

As mentioned above, she has had some extensive splint therapy treatment
and the orthodontics. She had her third molars removed on December 26,
2002, by Dr. <PERSON>. She has no problems with earaches, gets
occasional tinnitus, no vertigo, and no other joints bother her. She may
have some nocturnal clenching and bruxism as it is sort of inherent in
the family. She rates headaches that occur about two or three times per
week at a level of 7 in the frontal and temporal area. She rates her TMJ
pain at 8, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 4, diet at 6, and
disability at 3.

Primary Concerns 


1.  TMJ pain

2.  headaches

3.  Pain in jaw muscles

4.  Popping in jaw joints

5.  Severe snoring

6.  Earaches

7.  Difficulty eating and chewing

Current Medications

1.  Minocycline 100 mg b.i.d.

2.  Tazorac 0.1% ointment at bedtime

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 2 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are fairly well on
the facial midline. <PERSON> may deviate just slightly to the left about a
millimeter or so.

In profile view, she has fairly good balance between the upper lip,
cheeks, and nose. May be just slight AP deficiency in the maxilla maybe
1 to 2 mm. <PERSON> appears to be probably 8 to 10 mm AP deficient.
Chin-neckline is a little bit short, although the chin-neck angle is
fairly well defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars present. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior
teeth. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second
molars. In centric relation, she has a Class II end-on cuspid
relationship bilaterally. She has an anterior open bite of probably 1 to
2 mm. Has an overjet of about 3 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is
fairly level. <PERSON> appears clear, and soft palate and uvula look
relatively normal.

Intranasally, turbinate on the right side appears a little bit large,
and on the left side, it appears a little bit more normal. Airway looks
reasonably good. <PERSON> is somewhat wide. The nostrils are slightly
constricted but not too significantly. Luminal valves are a little bit
constricted. Holding her nostrils open significantly improved her
ability to breathe through her nose.

Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm, but the comfort zone is only to about
25 mm. Excursive movements are 8 mm to the right and 9 mm to the left.
On opening, she would occasionally have a definite pop in the right
joint with the disc going back into position at about 35 mm of opening
and a closing click at 25. This click, however, was not always there.
Left joint seemed to function reasonably smoothly. To palpation, she had
some moderate tenderness over the masseters and high moderate over the
TMJs and high moderate to severe over the styloid areas.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear. <LOCATION> appear quite large, more
so on the left side than the right side. All four third molars are
absent. The condyles look somewhat abnormal with evidence of osseous
changes being present. The condylar head and neck appear longer in
length on the right side than the left side. The left side shows what
appears to be some significant flattening on the anterior aspect of the
condyle. No other significant pathology is noted or seen.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum appears fairly
straight. <LOCATION> are moderately enlarged. Does appear relatively
symmetric.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it.
<PERSON> appears narrow anteroposteriorly. A little bit of anterior
beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Increased
anterior joint space, and the superior and posterior joint spaces are
probably a little bit smaller than normal. This may have been affected
somewhat with jaw position and/or previous splint therapy. Condylar neck
appears thin and somewhat elongated.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite small anteroposteriorly
compared to the size of the fossa. There is a little bit of anterior
beaking present. The condylar neck looks quite narrow. Articular
eminence is relatively shallow. <PERSON> may be a little bit more
centered in the joint as compared to the other side, although the
superior joint may be slightly decreased.

Opening views show good translation of the condyles bilaterally, both
going beyond the articular eminence. The left articular eminence is
significantly steeper than the right side.

Cephalometrically, the mandible appears to be in a skeletal Class II
position and is fairly significantly retruded. Oropharyngeal airway
appears narrow with the airway being only about 3 mm at the soft palate
level and about 4 mm at the base of the tongue. Neither Melody or her
family are aware of her snoring when she sleeps. She does sleep
predominantly on her side and is uncomfortable trying to sleep on her
back. She does have some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx that is still
present.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  <LOCATION> idiopathic condylar resorption with articular disc
    dislocations without reduction on the left side and an occasional
    reduction on the right side

2.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

3.  Slight AP maxillary deficiency

4.  AP mandibular deficiency

5.  Class II end-on occlusion

6.  Anterior open bite

7.  In centric relation, occludes predominantly on the molars with the
    rest of the teeth essentially being out of occlusion

8.  Headaches

9.  TMJ pain

10. Myofascial pain

11. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 to 4 mm
    (normal 11 mm)

12. Ear pain

13. Severe snoring

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch

2.  Surgery

    A.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and
        hydroxyapatite grafting

    C.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies for counterclockwise
        rotation and advancement

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
