<PERSON> 05/14/2008

<PERSON> is 64 years old, referred by <PERSON>, <LOCATION>, DMD, 111 Second
Avenue NE, Suite 1006, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>. <PERSON>’s TMJ problems
began in about 1978 when she developed pain in and around the right ear
and pain in her posterior teeth and right side head pain. Dr. <PERSON> performed the first operation in 1981 placing bilateral Proplast
Teflon implants into her tempomandibular joints. She then had a second
surgical procedure in 1982 by Dr. <PERSON> with the placement of
Vitek-Kent joint prostheses. The third procedure was carried out by Dr.
Gradke in 1984 with bilateral silastic implants. The fourth surgery was
performed again by Dr. <PERSON> with the placement of rib grafts into both
tempomandibular joints. She did okay for several years, but then in 2003
saw Dr. <PERSON> who felt she needed bilateral cartilage grafts to
the skull base with placement of prosthetic heads. This was performed in
2003 and then repeated again in 2006 due to a crack in the titanium neck
of the prosthesis.

<PERSON> has moderate snoring problems, moderate daytime tiredness, and
sleep apnea. She has difficulties breathing through her nose. <PERSON>

1.  Synthroid.

2.  Vicodin 10 mg 1 to 2 per day.

3.  Cymbalta 30 mg q.d.

4.  She also takes some vitamins and some other supplements.


1.  Severe TMJ pain.

2.  Severe headaches.

3.  Myofascial pain down through the head and neck area.

4.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

5.  Lower jaw severely retruded.

6.  Teeth do not fit together.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 25 mm and upper tooth
lip relationship is probably about -2 mm. The maxillary midline is
fairly close to being on the facial midline. The mandibular midline is
off to the right side about 2 mm. The chin is fairly straight. In
profile view, the maxillas are retruded by about 4-6 mm. The chin is
retruded by about 25 mm. <PERSON> neckline and chin angle are not defined.
Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. There is some moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch and a
little bit of increased curve of Spee. In the upper arch, she has all of
her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II cuspid
relationship and occludes only on the second molars. She has an open
bite of 4 to 5 mm and an overjet of 4 to 5 mm. To palpation, <PERSON> has
severe pain through most of the head and neck area. Incisal opening is
23 mm, opening without severe pain 20 mm, but there are no excursion
movements. The oropharyngeal tissues are very hard to visualize, but it
appears that the uvula may be just slightly elongated and the soft
palate may be a little bit elongated. I could not see the facial pillars
to evaluate them nor could I see the tonsils. Intranasally, the
turbinates appear relatively normal. The septum has some minor
deviations, but for the most part appears normal. There does not appear
to be any major nasal airway obstruction. She does have moderate snoring
and moderate daytime somnolence, and she does have sleep apnea, probably
moderate to severe. She has a moderate to severe sleep disorder and
frequently wakes up at night.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars as well as the maxillary right first molar replaced by a small
pontic. She has a 3-unit bridge in that area. She has a root canal in
the mandibular right first molar. She has bilateral prostheses in place,
probably Synthes or <PERSON> type of prostheses with no opposing
fossa. Both prostheses are anterior to the fossa and actually sitting in
the infratemporal fossa. There appears to be heterotopic bone in and
around the fossa area that extends inferiorly, being a larger amount on
the left side as compared to the right side. Sinuses look relatively
clear.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight.
<LOCATION> appear moderate in size. Sinuses appear relatively clear. The
prostheses are seen to be positioned out almost lateral to the zygomatic
arch. Again, there does not appear to be any opposing fossa component.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condylar heads appear to be sitting up
in the infratemporal fossa area and perhaps have settled up through the
zygomatic arch. The prosthesis appears to be intact, but appears to be a
2-piece component.

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows that the condyle is anterior to the
fossa and sitting in the infratemporal fossa. The prosthesis appears
intact, although it is a 2-piece component. There is no opposing fossa
in either joint identifiable. On opening, there does not appear to be
any translation.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a severe
mandibular retrusion. The prosthesis condyles are anterior to the
tempomandibular joint fossa and again are sitting up in the
infratemporal areas. The maxilla appears retruded and there appears to
be some posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. She has severe
decreased oropharyngeal airway with an airway dimension of only about
maybe 2 mm at the most at the soft palate area and at the base of the
tongue no more than 4 mm. <PERSON> does have a tooth size discrepancy with
a <PERSON>’s difference of 2 mm. <PERSON> states she has difficulties
swallowing which would be compatible with severe decrease in
oropharyngeal airway.


1.  <LOCATION> failed total joint prostheses.

2.  Bilateral prostheses displaced anterior and superior into the
    infratemporal fossa with erosion of the zygomatic arch.

3.  <LOCATION> bone formation in both glenoid fossas.

4.  Severe retrusion of the mandible.

5.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

6.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

7.  Class II occlusion.

8.  Anterior open bite.

9.  Occluding only on the second molars.

10. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm
    (normal is 11 mm).

11. Crowding of lower anterior arch.

12. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 2 mm.

13. Overangulation of the lower incisors.

14. Severe TMJ pain.

15. Severe headaches.

16. Severe myofascial pain.

17. Severe masticatory dysfunction.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Removal of her previously placed failed prostheses.

    b.  <LOCATION> extensive debridement and removal of heterotopic
        bone formation in the glenoid fossas bilaterally.

    c.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down
        graft it posteriorly.

    e.  <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock).

    f.  Medpor implant to anterior mandible.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
