<PERSON>

<PERSON> is 26 years old. <PERSON> is actually referred by Dr. <PERSON>.
was 9 years old she did have a three-wheeler accident where the handle
bars swung up and hit her in the side of the cheek and she had a black
on the left side. This began some migraine headaches for her but she was
unaware of any joint problems at that time. She had orthodontics
beginning in 1991 at the age of 11 for 3 years. Following removal of her
orthodontic appliances, she started to have clicking in her jaw joints.
By age 15, she was referred by Dr. <PERSON> who made some splints
for her. This did not seem to help her a whole bunch and she then saw
Dr. <PERSON> who did bilateral arthrocentesis. This did help her for
awhile but her bite continued to shift and move. At age 17, she had
orthodontics for the second time but only on the upper arch for about a
year. She was then placed in retainers. Her pain continued to increase.
Her opening decreased and she had increased difficulties with chewing.
Her migraines are getting worse. She saw Dr. <PERSON> about her
migraines. She had another splint then for about six months. She then
saw Dr. <PERSON> in <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>. He did bilateral arthrocentesis x3.
After the first two, she did have surgery in May of 2004 that were
bilateral arthroplasties to reposition the disc and repair a perforation
on the left side. She had some bone recontouring done at least on the
left side and maybe the right side as well. By September of 2004 she
redeveloped severe pain again predominately on the left side. On January
26, 2005, she had a left TMJ arthroplasty done once again. After that
she has had splints. She had an NTI splint by Dr. <PERSON>. She has
had 3 rounds of Botox injections. The first 2 would help for about 3
months or so. The last one was of no real significant benefit. She has
had physical therapy that has not been helpful for her either.


1.  Zanaflex 4 mg q.h.s.

2.  Elavil 25 mg q.h.s.

3.  MS <PERSON> 30 mg daily.

4.  Inderal q.h.s. for migraines.

5.  <PERSON> t.i.d.

6.  Prevacid q.h.s.

7.  Birth control pills.

<PERSON> has no problems with tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. She does
get rather severe earaches on the left side. Other joints that bother
her include her wrists, fingers, knees, left ankle and toes. She has an
allergy to penicillin and Compazine. She does have difficulties wearing
cheap earrings. She occasionally runs a low-grade fever. At Christmas
she was diagnosed as having H. pylori in her mouth and stomach. She was
put on some antibiotics and this helped significantly with that problem.
She actually does clinch her teeth at night and perhaps during the day
at times but not consistently. She does have a sleep disorder and does
not sleep well mainly because of the pain factors. She usually feels
better in the mornings and then the pain gets worse as the day
progresses on.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being on the
facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is off to the right about 1
mm.

KERI SMITH 03/09/2006 Page 2

The chin is fairly close to being on midline. In profile view, <PERSON> has
fairly good balance between the upper lips cheeks and nose. She may have
just some slight AP deficiency. <PERSON> is deficient by probably about 10
mm. Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. She
does have a head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, <PERSON> has
all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has lingual
tori that are fairly large. She has good attached gingiva around the
lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back
through the second molars present. There is an end-on Class II occlusion
about 2 mm on the left and 3 mm on the right. She actually has about a 2
mm deep bite relationship. She has an overjet of probably about 2 to 3
mm. <PERSON> appears normal. The uvula is relatively small. The soft
palate and faucial pillars are all within normal limits. She reports no
problems breathing through her nose. She does have some mild snoring and
moderate daytime somnolence. She is not aware of any sleep apnea
problems. She does have a sleep disorder though associated with her pain
factors.

She has a constant headache that occurs on the left frontal and temple
areas at a level of 5. She has pain in the left joint at a level of 10
and on the right side a level of 2. Average daily pain is level 9. She
rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 7. Incisal opening
maximally is 31 mm but to only 50 mm without significant pain. Excursive
movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 6 mm. Joints with limited
movement due function reasonably smoothly. To palpation, she has rather
severe over the left TMJ, high moderate pain over the left masseter,
left styloid area and moderate pain over the left SCM, left posterior
neck and bilateral shoulder areas. She has milder tenderness over the
temporalis muscles and the right TMJ. She also has left-side Fry's
syndrome when she eats.


Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She has a crown and
root canal on maxillary right second molar. Sinuses appear relatively
clear. Joints appear quite arthritic, left side worse than the right
side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum is relatively
straight. <LOCATION> are moderate size but appears that there is a good
nasal airway.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the articular eminence is quite flat
probably due to previous surgery. Decreased superior and posterior joint
space. The condyle does look arthritic.

Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be significantly decreased
joint space and a little broad osteophyte off the top off the top of the
condyle. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular
eminence is relatively shallow. On opening, there is restricted
translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a skeletal Class II
jaw relationship. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures
about 5 perhaps maybe 6 mm and the base of the tongue measures about 7
mm.

KERI SMITH 03/09/2006 Page 3


1.  <LOCATION> severe arthritis.

2.  AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

5.  Class II end-on occlusion.

6.  Severe TMJ pain, left greater than right.

7.  Left-sided headaches.

8.  Myofascial pain.

9.  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.

10. Sleep disorder.

11. Sleep apnea symptoms.

12. Overangulation of lower incisors.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the mandible in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    d.  <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest grafts from the abdomen.)

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
