<PERSON>

<PERSON> is 26 years old, birth date 07/14/1985. <PERSON> is referred by Dr.
<PERSON>, 2300 <LOCATION>, Suite 2, <LOCATION>, TX 79704. She has
had a consultation with Dr. <PERSON>, 4610 <PERSON>, Suite A-9,
<LOCATION>, TX 79705.

<PERSON>’s joint problems began she believes when she was about 24 years
that she has struck her jaw several times while cheerleading. She did
have orthodontics from the age of 13 to 14. Relative to her TMJ
problems, the only treatment she has had currently is splint therapy
which was initiated in April 2011. However, this made her pain
significantly worse so she discontinued using it. She has had her third
molars previously removed, but has retained maxillary third molars.
<PERSON> rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the frontal, temporal and
posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at
7, jaw function at 9, diet at 7, and disability at 9. She gets frequent
earaches, daily tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. She has no hearing
loss and no other joints bother her. She does have allergies to outside
stuff. Earrings and rings cause discoloration of her skin, but she has
no pain or discomfort that she has associated with those. She is aware
of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and she catches herself clenching
during the day as well.


1.  Adderall XR 30 mg q.d.

2.  Lexapro 10 mg q.d.

3.  Birth control pill.

4.  Cyclobenzaprine 10 mg q.d.

5.  Valacyclovir 1000 mg when needed for cold sores.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3
mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline and lower
dental midline is about 1 mm to the right and <PERSON> is about 2 to 3 mm to
the right. In profile, she has fairly good facial balance. Intraorally,
she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has
some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch particularly on the right
side. She has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all
of her teeth back through the second molars. The upper arch appears
fairly well aligned. She has a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally.
She has about a 3 mm vertical overbite relationship. Oropharyngeal
tissues look normal and healthy. <LOCATION> are relatively normal,
although the right side is slightly larger than the left. Nasal anatomy
looks relatively normal. To palpation, she has moderate pain over the
TMJs, milder pain over the right temporalis and high moderate pain over
the right styloid area. On opening, she has some crepitation in the
right joint. The left side is not particularly noisy today, although she
says that side does click and pop at times. On her right side, she does
get closed lock episodes periodically. The maximal incisal opening is 57
mm, opening without pain 31 mm. The excursion movement to the right is 9
mm and to the left 10 mm. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal
plane with the right side being 2 mm higher than the left side. <PERSON>
has just slight increased fullness on the left side of the mandible
being about 2 to 3 mm more prominent with the left angle as compared to
the right side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of mandibular third
molars that were previously extracted. Maxillary third molars are
present and appear erupted. The septum appears relatively straight and
the turbinates appear relatively normal in size. The sinuses appear
clear. Difficult to evaluate the joints on this radiograph.

Coronal view shows that the nasal septum is deviated off a little bit
towards the left side. The turbinates are relatively normal in size with
the right one being slightly larger than the left one. Airway looks good
however. Sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows the base of the septum fairly straight and the
turbinates are relatively normal in size with the right one being larger
than the left one. The sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.
There may be a little bit of an osteophytic kind of development on the
top of the condyle towards the medial aspect of the joint. The articular
eminence has a moderate inclination. The condyle appears almost too
large for the fossa. There is a little bit of anterior beaking at the
lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology
laterally, but medially there is some flattening on the anterior head
and a little bit of anterior beaking present. The posterior joint space
is decreased. The articular eminence is fairly steep. There is an
increased anterior joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral
width. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.
The joint space appears fairly well balanced in the joint.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral
width, although just slightly more narrow than the opposite side. The
lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 4 to 5 mm. There
appears to be some decreased vertical and lateral joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has basically a Class I
skeletal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway may be slightly narrow, but
it may be partially due to head posture and position.


1.  <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc dislocation being worse
    on the right side than the left side.

2.  Mandibular relative hyperplasia.

3.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm
    higher than the left side.

4.  Mandibular dental midline 1 mm to the right and chin 2 to 3 mm to
    the right.

5.  TMJ pain.

6.  Headaches.

7.  Myofascial pain.

8.  Malaligned maxillary third molars.

9.  Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 2 mm.


1. Presurgical orthodontics.

a. Align and level maxillary arch. Consider opening 1 mm of space
between the upper laterals and cuspids to accommodate for the tooth size
discrepancy.

b. Align and level mandibular arch. Consider slenderizing the lower
anterior teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth
size discrepancy.

2. Surgery.

a. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
Mitek anchors.

b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain the Class I
occlusal relationship.

3. Postsurgical orthodontics.

<PERSON> occlusion.

b. Retain occlusion with a Hawley retainer in the maxillary arch and a
fixed retainer in the lower anterior arch. Do not use Essix type of
retainers.

4. If space is opened in the upper arch, then consider bonding to fill
those spaces.
