<PERSON> 5/5/05

Referred by: Dr. <PERSON>.

Age: 50.

Date of Birth: 7/31/54.

Home address: 5 Toussaint Dr., <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>, 63366.

Home phone: 636240-1002.

Work: 314-654-7478 (work time 2 a.m. to 12 noon.)

<PERSON> was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 2001. She apparently
had a dislocated jaw at the time. She was taken to the ER and the jaw
was reduced. She also injured her right knee in the accident and
subsequently had surgery on her right knee. Since then, she has had
continued significant problems with her jaw function and with her jaw
joints. Treatment to date includes injections in the muscles in the
head, neck, back and jaw area; physical therapy for 1-1/2 years and
splint therapy since 2001.


1.  Earaches.

2.  TMJ pain.

3.  Headaches.

4.  Myofascial pain around the head, neck, jaws and shoulder areas.

5.  Difficulty with eating and chewing.

She gets earaches, tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. The other joints
that bother her include her neck, right knee predominately when there
are weather changes and her left foot where she has previously fractured
her 5th toe and it is malaligned. She states that she wakes up stiff
everyday but then as the day goes on at work, her pain problems become
worse. She starts work at 2 in the morning and works normally until noon
or later. She apparently does a lot of computer work and this seems to
aggravate her situation. She says that when she wears her bite plate
that she does not clench her teeth but without she does clench and also
does this during the day. She said she had a bone scan done and she has
decreased bone density in her left hip but she has no problems with it.
Medications she takes include ibuprofen 800 mg tablets as needed and
usually takes it daily for her headaches. She also takes Celebrex daily.
She gets daily headaches predominately in the temple and back of her
head area at a level of 5. She rates her TMJ pain at 5, average daily
pain at 5, jaw function at 5, diet at 8, and disability at 4.

To palpation she has moderate pain in the temporalis and masseter
muscles and mild to moderate pain over the TMJs.

Based on MRI, history as well as photographs, <PERSON>'s diagnoses would be

1.  <LOCATION> articular disc dislocation.

2.  Mandibular hyperplasia (relative).

3.  Headaches.

4.  TMJ pain.

5.  Myofascial pain.

6.  Masticatory dysfunction.

<PERSON> Page 2


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Place orthodontic appliances on the maxillary teeth and begin to
        align and level the arch.

    b.  Place orthodontic appliances on the mandibular teeth and begin
        to align and level the arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw
        stabilization.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I answered all the questions that <PERSON> had at this time. She has some
financial questions and insurance questions and I told her to call Eve
and discuss those factors with her. She will do so. She is to call us if
she has any other questions or concerns. We will prepare a letter of
preauthorization for her insurance company.
