DAWN STEIGER Telephone Conversation 01-15-05

Dawn is 37 years old and works in a drug and alcohol rehabilitation
center in <LOCATION>. She was involved in an MVA 15 years ago and after
that did have some joint problems. Her jaws did make noises for a while,
but that is pretty much gone away now. The primary concerns she has are

1.  No room for her tongue

2.  Aesthetics with significant facial imbalance

3.  Facial asymmetry that may be worsening

4.  Difficulties eating and chewing

5.  Pain over the TMJ area and behind the lower jaw

6.  Noises in the joints with side-to-side movements

7.  Can’t sing anymore because the tongue feels constricted and pushes
    against the soft palate

Dawn has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss.
Only her right wrist gives her problems. She has had previous knee
surgeries x 2 on the left knee, and that knee is doing well now. She
gets seasonal allergies but is not aware of any problems with jewelry.
She does feel her tongue is pushed backwards in her jaws and that there
is no room for her tongue. She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She
says her mother has a similar kind of jaw problem and has a lot of
clicking and popping in her joints. <PERSON> has no significant problems
with headaches. No particular problems with TMJ pain except to
palpation. She does get weekly pain problems down through her neck and
shoulders that range from a level of 3 to 6. She rates her jaw function
at 3, diet at 4, and disability at 2. To palpation, she has no
tenderness in the temporalis or muscle areas but has pain at a level of
4 directly over the TMJ area and behind the mandible in the styloid
area.

The only medication she takes is Synthroid.


1.  Rule out right mandibular condylar osteochondroma/osteoma

2.  Maxillary AP hypoplasia and asymmetry

3.  Mandibular prognathism and asymmetry

4.  AP macrogenia

5.  TMJ pain

6.  Crowding, lower anterior arch

7.  Moderate anterior deep bite

8.  End-on Class III occlusion by approximately 2 mm

9.  Slight reverse curve of occlusion, upper arch

10. Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch

11. Attrition, lower anterior teeth

12. Low occlusal plane angulation

13. Decrease in oropharyngeal airway

14. Possible bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations


1.  MRI of left and right TMJs

2.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

DAWN STIGER 01-15-05 Page 2

B.  Align and level mandibular arch

C.  May need to open up the bite slightly in order to align and level
    the lower arch. Cuspids are slightly elevated compared to the rest
    of the posterior teeth and with the incisors so try to level the
    cuspids appropriately vertically

3.  Surgery

    A.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, move the
        posterior aspect superiorly, and level it transversely

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a clockwise direction where the incisors will come forward
        and the chin will rotate posteriorly slightly

    C.  Consider mandibular right condylectomy if growth is continuing
        to occur

    D.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors if the discs are, in fact, displaced and
        confirmed by MRI

    E.  Consider anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to reduce the
        prominence of the chin if the patient still feels chin would be
        too strong

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

5.  Restorative dentistry to rebuild incisal edges of lower incisors
