<PERSON> 03/17/2010

<PERSON> presents for follow-up evaluation. She is now 10 years and 11
months post surgery. <PERSON> did fairly well for about 10 years and then
about a year ago she developed headaches. She would get them about once
a month. She would treat them by getting a Toradol injection, taking
<PERSON>, and usually an antibiotic such as a Z-Pak or Levaquin. After 2 or
3 days, this would relieve her headaches and she would be good for
another month. About 2 weeks ago, she began developing significant
tiredness, headaches in the temporal area, neck and shoulder pain, her
equilibrium has been significantly affected, and she has vertigo and
significant problems with nausea. She has left-sided fullness and
pressure in the ear and tenderness around the jaw and jaw joint area.
She does have retainers that she wears at night. About 3 or 4 years ago,
Dr. <PERSON> in <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>, apparently advanced her
mandible forward. She was stabilized with what appears to be 1 screw on
the right side and a bone plate on the left side. Her occlusion looks
good at this time.

The headaches she gets once a month she rates at a level of 8 to 9. She
rates her TMJ pain on the best days at 2 and on the worst days at 4. Her
average daily pain is a level of 3 on her better days and 8 when she has
her headaches. She rates her jaw function at 4, diet at 5, disability at
8. She feels she cannot work now because of her vertigo and nausea
problems. When she gets up, she is having more difficulties maintaining
her balance and has to hold on to things. Her occlusion looks good. To
palpation, she has severe pain over the masseters, TMJs, retromandibular
areas, SCMs, posterior neck and shoulder areas and milder tenderness
over the temporalis muscles. She has numbness in her lower right lip and
chin area since her mandibular surgery that was performed about 3 or 4
years ago. She has a feeling of fullness in her ears, no tinnitus, but
does have vertigo and nausea. She believes she does clench her teeth at
night and may also do it during the day. She is in a stressful job

1.  Synthroid 75 mcg per day.

2.  Ambien 5 mg q.h.s. that she has been on for several years.

3.  Flexeril 5 mg q.h.s. that she has been on for several years.

4.  Mobic 7.5 mg 2 to 3 times per week.

5.  Toradol 60 mg IM q.monthly.

6.  Z-Pak or Levaquin periodically.

She and her husband are not really aware of any significant facial
swelling that she has.

Radiographic evaluation shows that she has bilateral TMJ Concepts total
joint prostheses. She does have reactive heterotopic bone that has
formed on the posterior aspect of both condyles. This possibly could be
creating her symptomatology. When I originally saw her, her symptoms
included significant problems with vertigo which were cleared by the TMJ
surgery. Therefore, I feel there could be a correlation with her current
symptoms with the heterotopic bone formation.


1.  Stop taking the Ambien and Flexeril.

2.  Klonopin 1 mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, one tablet q.h.s.,
    refill x5.

3.  Meclizine 25 mg tablets, dispensing 40 tablets, one tablet q.6 hours
    p.r.n. vertigo/nausea, refill x3.

4.  <LOCATION>, dispensing 40 tablets, 1 tablet q.6 hours p.r.n.
    pain, refill x3.

She is to call me in 1 to 2 weeks to let me know of her progress.


1.  <LOCATION> heterotopic bone formation and fibrosis.

2.  TMJ pain, myofascial pain, and headaches.

3.  Vertigo and nausea.

4.  <PERSON> bone screw right mandibular posterior body inferior
    border area


1. Medications as described above.

2. Surgery.

a. <LOCATION> debridement of removal of heterotopic bone and fibrotic
tissues

b. <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

c. Removal of bone screw from right mandibular posterior body inferior
border area.
