<PERSON> 07/18/2011

<PERSON> is now 61 years old. She is 7 years and 9 months post surgery for
bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
and fat grafts. She rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the frontal,
temporal and posterior head area, but almost daily escalate to about a 9
for probably 1 to 2 hours. Stress, any kind of body movement or jaw
movement, talking, eating causes headaches to escalate daily to about a
level of 9 or so. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 6,
but it does escalate to about a 10 every day. Jaw function is at 6, diet

1.  Advil 3 tablets q.h.s. which is significantly helps her airway
    breathing.

2.  Oxycontin 40 mg b.i.d.

3.  Oxy-IR 10 mg 4 per day.

4.  Celebrex 400 mg q.d.

5.  Zantac 150 mg q.d.

6.  Gravol 1/2 tablet q.d.

7.  <PERSON> mg per day (laxative).

8.  APO-hydroxyzine 25 mg p.r.n. allergies.

9.  Stool softener.

She gets earaches and sometimes gets lightening zaps through the jaw ear
area. She gets tinnitus occasionally. She has moderate occurrence of
vertigo and no hearing loss except when her headaches get really bad. In
March 2011, she had some breathing problems that she developed and was
hospitalized for 10 days. They were unable to find any reason for the
breathing problems after extensive testing. I am not sure if they
evaluated for sleep apnea. She does tend to sleep in an upright sitting
position. She says when she takes 3 Advil at night she can breathe
without snoring but without it she tends to snore a lot. She says she
has frequent problems with facial swelling, although she does not
exhibit any significant swelling today. She says sometimes her eyes
swell shut and she gets swelling throughout her face. She has developed
a lot of new allergies and gets hives. She is hypersensitive to chlorine
in swimming pools, pets, plants, etc. She notes that she does have a
degenerated spine. Other joints that bother her include her knees,
fingers, hips, and spine and aggravates the pain with changes in
barometric pressure. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at
nighttime or during the day.

To palpation, she has rather severe pain to palpation in the temporalis,
masseters, TMJs and retromandibular area and moderate pain in the medial
pterygoids, SCMs, and posterior neck. The incisal opening is 29 mm with
excursion movement to the right 1 mm and to the left 2 mm. Her incisal
opening has decreased another 3 mm since last fall.

Radiographically, there appears to be heterotopic bone on the medial
side of the right mandibular prosthesis. Also, I believe that she is
developing multiple hypersensitivities that may include sensitivities to
the metals in the prostheses.


1.  <LOCATION> bone on medial side of right TMJ prosthesis.

2.  Headaches.

3.  TMJ pain.

4.  Myofascial pain.

5.  Multiple hypersensitivities to chemicals, metals, plants, and
    animals.


1.  Medical grade CT scan of TMJs and jaw joints including coronal,
    axial, and sagittal views.

2.  Consider debridement of right joint and perhaps left joint if
    heterotopic bone formation confirmed.

3.  Continue to monitor the patient.
