<PERSON> 10-15-03

<PERSON> is 40 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 6 <PERSON>, <LOCATION>, CA 94901-2507.

Patient History

He has had previous nose surgery for nasal fractures x 2. Otherwise,
<PERSON> is in good health.

Patient Concerns

1.  Teeth don’t fit together

2.  His front teeth keep getting chipped and have to be rebuilt

3.  Difficulties eating certain foods

4.  Difficulties breathing through the nose

5.  Severe snoring when he sleeps

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
almost -4 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline appear to be
pretty much on the facial midline. Maxillary midline may be just a
little bit off to the right side about a millimeter. Nose is somewhat
deformed from previous trauma with the inferior nasal bones being
shifted off significantly toward the left side and then coming back onto
the midline at the nasal tip.

In profile view, <PERSON> has some AP deficiency of the maxilla. Vertical
maxillary deficiency and over-closure of the maxilla accentuates the
depression in his nasal bones. <PERSON> may be just slightly strong.
Chin-neckline is fairly long, but chin-neck angle is not well-defined.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth teeth back through the
second molars. Mandibular left second molar is in significant lingual
inclination. Teeth appear to be well-worn. Has some retraction of his
gingiva but appears he may have had a gingival graft there to help
stabilize that situation. He has had gum grafts done at least twice in
the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he is missing the first
bicuspids but has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars.
Has a Class III cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally. Has a left
posterior crossbite and a right posterior crossbite. Has an end-on
incisor relationship. Has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper
arch and maybe a slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch
as well. Has slight hypereruption of the right cuspid compared to the
first bicuspid. Intraorally, oropharynx appears clear. He has his
tonsils present. Seems to be some moderate transverse narrowness of the
oropharynx. Uvula is a little bit hyperplastic.

TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly.

Intranasally, <PERSON> has significant deformation of the nasal septum.
Anteriorly, it is deviated significantly off toward the left side, and
more posteriorly it is deviated severely off to the right side causing
nasal airway obstruction on both sides. Turbinates don’t really look too
hyperplastic, and most of the obstruction appears to be associated with
the septum itself.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex reveals sinuses look clear. <PERSON> appears quite wide associated
with the severe deviations to both sides. <LOCATION> particularly on the
right side look a little bit large, but this may be just due to the
severe nasal septal deviation. <PERSON> look a little bit flattened on
the anterior heads but otherwise look pretty good. Missing upper first
bicuspids and all four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are
present. He has crowns on a couple of the teeth on the right side
including the lower right first molar and the upper right bicuspid.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has very strong anteroposterior
dimension. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Appears to be good
joint space around all sides.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a bit flattened on the
anterior side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Good AP
dimension. Appears to be a balanced joint space around the condyle.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. Styloid
processes are seen and are moderate in size.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear to be equally opacified
throughout the head area. Airway looks actually reasonably good, but we
can’t see the cartilage which is where most of the obstruction seems to
be. He has a large septal spur that appears up above the inferior
turbinate that may be causing some major obstruction.

Cephalometrically, he has a mild skeletal Class III jaw relationship.
<PERSON> was taken in the open bite position so it doesn’t detect the
occlusion in centric relation. Oropharyngeal airway appears decreased,
and at the soft palate level only measures about 5 mm, but at the base
of the tongue measures about 14 mm. Tongue appears to fill the majority
of the oral cavity in this particular view. Tongue might be a little bit
more posteriorly displaced if the jaws were together.

<PERSON> reports that he is tired a lot during the day and particularly in
the afternoons. He used to have a lot of trouble falling asleep when
driving. He doesn’t drive in the afternoons or the evenings because he
falls asleep. He may have some concerns with sleep apnea perhaps.
Apparently his wife has noted apneic episodes when he is sleeping. In
fact, the snoring is so bad that she sleeps in a different room.
Although the tongue fills the entire oral cavity, it doesn’t appear
excessively large per se.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  AP maxillary deficiency

2.  Transverse maxillary deficiency

3.  Vertical maxillary deficiency

4.  Class III end-on occlusion

5.  Bilateral posterior and anterior crossbite

6.  End-on incisor relationship

7.  Missing maxillary first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic
    treatment

8.  Severely deviated nasal septum

9.  Significant nasal airway obstruction

10. Decreased oropharyngeal airway

11. Hypertrophied soft palate and uvula

12. Severe snoring

13. Daytime somnolence

14. Sleep apnea syndrome

15. External nasal deformity secondary to previous trauma (x 4)

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Place brackets on all of the
        teeth. Open a slight space around each of the upper lateral
        incisors to equal about 0.5 mm to 1 mm. Tip lateral incisor
        roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
        interdental osteotomies that will be necessary at surgery

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Please brackets on all of the
        teeth including the second molars

2.  Surgery

    A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to bring the maxilla forward,
        downgraft it, and expand it

    B.  Nasal septoplasty

    C.  External nasal reconstruction including cranial bone graft

    D.  Harvest cranial bone graft

    E.  Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
