<PERSON>

Blake is 17 years old, birth date 02/01/1994, referred by Dr. <PERSON>
in <LOCATION>.

<PERSON>’s TMJ problem began in September 2009 when he fell, hit his chin,
and knocked his front teeth out of alignment. Almost immediately after
that injury, he developed left TMJ pain. <PERSON> has been through a
tremendous amount of treatment since that time and includes but not in

1.  Splint therapy x2 from January 2010 through January 2011 and then
    again in August 2011.

2.  Orthodontics beginning in September 2011.

3.  Steroid injections x5 in the left TMJ.

4.  Physical therapy x2.

5.  Narrow stimulators.

6.  Acupuncture.

7.  <LOCATION> massage.

8.  Iontophoresis.

9.  <PERSON> ganglion blocks.

10. Pain pumps.

11. Prialt (snail venom).

12. Surgery on March 2011 for a left disc plication.

<PERSON>’s primary concerns at this time are constant severe left TMJ pain.
<PERSON> gets headache at about level of 4 in the left temporal area. He
has constant severe pain in the left TMJ at an average of about 8 but it
ranges from 6 to 10. His average daily pain is an 8 with a range of 6 to
10. He has good jaw function and rates that at 0, diet at 4, disability
at 8. He gets occasional left sided earaches, but when they do occur
they are quite severe in pain. He has no tinnitus, gets occasional
vertigo, and he feels he has some hearing loss. The only joint that
really bothers him is his right ankle. He has no known allergies, but
does have an eosinophilic condition. He did have a problem with what was
termed autonomic dysfunction and had fainting episodes that occurred
daily and was treated for about 5 months until it was finally under
control. He was born with spina bifida. He also is a tiptoer.

<PERSON> has moderate snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, but no sleep
apnea. He is predominantly a mouth breather at night and most of the

1.  Lexapro.

2.  <LOCATION>.

3.  OxyContin 40 mg q.i.d.

4.  Oxycodone 20 to 25 mg q.4 hours.

5.  Marinol (THC) 12.5 mg b.i.d.

6.  Mirtazapine 15 mg p.r.n.

During his surgery in March 2011, apparently the condyle was shaved off
a little bit probably to make room for the disc. Since then, it has been
reported that the condyle has shortened even further.

CLINICAL EVALUATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good symmetry in
the middle and upper third face. The maxillary midline is about 1 mm to
the left as is the mandibular dental midline. Vertical height of the
inferior border of the mandible on the right side is about 10 mm lower
than the inferior border on the left side. The chin is about 7 mm to the
left. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 6
mm on the left and 7 mm on the right. In profile, the maxilla is
retruded about 5 to 6 mm. The chin is retruded about 12 to 15 mm. The
chin neckline is somewhat short. Lip incompetence is almost 16 mm.
Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. There is a transverse
cant in the occlusal plane with the left maxillary cuspid and mandibular
cuspid being 3 mm higher on the left than the right side. <PERSON> has
about a 2 mm vertical over bite relationship. He is fairly close to
being a Class I cuspid relationship, but he is missing the first
bicuspids. Mandibular first bicuspids have been extracted for
orthodontic reasons. The spaces fortunately are still there.
Intranasally, turbinates are moderate to severe in size. Septum appears
reasonable straight. He probably has moderate to severe nasal airway
obstruction. To palpation, he essentially has no pain around the head
and neck area except for some mild tenderness over the left TMJ. <PERSON>
has an incisal opening of 52 mm, but he has a zero opening relative to
abilities to open without pain. He has pain throughout the entire
opening cycle. Excursion movements are 6 mm in each direction. The
excursion movements create significant pain for him as well.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. The mandibular first bicuspids bilaterally are absent. He has a
root canal on a maxillary first molar and the right central incisor. The
vertical height of the mandibular body on the left side measures about
39 mm and on the right side in the first molar measures 42 mm. Vertical
height of the ramus and condyle on the left side measures about 65 mm
and on the right side measures about 78 mm.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are quite large and appear to
block off a good portion of the nasal airway. Sinuses however are clear.

Axial view shows that the septum is reasonably straight and sinuses are
clear. <LOCATION> are quite large and appear to block a good bit of the
functional airway.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone some changes
as there are osteoarthritic changes within the joint. However, the
vertical joint space is actually greater than normal. There appears to
be a little area of calcification and maybe just some dense fibrotic
tissue within the joint space. There appear to be some degenerative
changes in the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is elongated and much
longer than normal. It has a odd configure to it at the top with the
condylar head being narrower than the condylar neck. The thickness of
the condylar neck on the right side measures about 10 mm whereas on the
left side it measures about 7 to 8 mm. The articular eminence is
relatively normal.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is smaller in size and
arthritic, however, the vertical joint space is significantly greater
than normal. There appear to be some degenerative changes in the fossa
and perhaps there has been some heterotopic bone that has been deposited
in the fossa part.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is excessively long in
vertical height possibly compatible with an osteochondroma. The lateral
rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 or 4 mm. There is decreased
lateral joint space. There is a little bit of an odd curvature to the
condylar head and neck. The condylar neck is significantly wider on this
side measuring 10 to 11 mm, whereas the condylar head at the same level
on the left side measures only about 7 to 8 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla was AP deficient
and anterior vertically hypoplastic. The mandible is AP deficient. There
are two occlusal plane levels with about a 3 to 4 mm vertical difference
from the left side to the right side. The vertical height of the
mandible on the right side extends almost 11 mm below the inferior
border of the left side.

The mother told me that <PERSON> has had suicidal tendency because of his
severe pain. He has asked for a gun to end his life. He is in just
desperate need of help.

Based on clinical, radiographic, and MRI analyses, <PERSON>’s diagnoses are

1.  Left TMJ severe reactive arthritis.

2.  Right mandibular condylar osteochondroma.

3.  Maxillary AP hyperplasia but vertical hyperplasia as well as
    transverse asymmetry with the left side shorter than the right side.

4.  Mandibular AP hyperplasia but transverse asymmetry with the right
    side being significantly longer (10 to 11 mm) than the left side.

5.  Transverse cant of the occlusal plane with the right cuspid 3 mm
    lower than the left cuspid.

6.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

7.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal
    airway dimension 11 mm).

8.  Missing mandibular first bicuspids.

9.  Severe left TMJ pain.


1. Presurgical orthodontics.

a. Continue to align and level maxillary arch.

b. Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Cut power chain and
maintain the lower first bicuspid spaces.

2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3. Surgery.

a. Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts
total joint prostheses.

b. Right mandibular low condylectomy and articular disc repositioning
with Mitek anchor.

c. Right mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomy to advance the
mandible.

d. Maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly and advance.

e. Fat graft to left TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).

f. Left coronoidotomy.

<PERSON> partial inferior turbinectomies.

h. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.

4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5. Placement of dental implants to replace the missing mandibular first
bicuspids.

6. Restorative dentistry to place crowns on the implants.
