<PERSON> TOWNS 09/11/2006

William is 25 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>. He has ADHD
and PDD. Previous surgeries include displacing tubes in ears and he had
a pilonidal cyst removed but is in good health otherwise. Apparently he
had a seizure about 12 years ago apparently from Mellaril. He was placed
on Depakote for about 12 years but physician more recently told him that
he did not need that medicine anymore.


1.  Adderall SR 20 mg 1 to 2 tabs in the morning and 1 in the afternoon.

2.  Benztropine 1 mg b.i.d.

3.  InnoPran XL 80 mg daily.

4.  Risperdal 10 mg b.i.d. and then one additional ½ tablet at noontime.

5.  Melatonin 10 mg at bedtime.

6.  Multivitamins in the morning.

He had an adverse reaction to Mellaril, Seroquel, Xanax, Codeine and
Actifed.


1.  Teeth and jaws do not fit together.

2.  Difficulties breathing through the nose.

He has no history of headaches or TMJ pain problems.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is probably about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip
relationship is about 4.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the
facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is maybe about 1 mm to the
left. Nasal is about 2 mm to the left as well. In profile view, <PERSON>
has some deficiency in the maxillary projection of probably 4 to 5 mm
which actually looks to be in fairly good AP position. There is lip
incompetence approximately 10 mm. There is a C-shaped curve in the upper
lip. He shows about 2 to 3 mm of his lower teeth with his lower lip
relaxed. Intraorally, he has all of his lower teeth back to the second
molars except he is missing the right second molar. He has some crowding
in the lower anterior arch. He has some periodontal tenderness. He has
decalcification of his teeth. In the upper arch, he has fairly
constricted palate. The cuspids are completely blocked out of the arch.
He has the rest of his teeth back through the second molars present.
Left lateral incisors blocked out lingually. He has a Class II end-on
cuspid relationship on the left side. He is fairly close to Class I on
the right side. He has a reverse curve of <PERSON> present in the upper
arch. Transverse width of the maxilla about 1 mm or so in the first
molar area. He has an extremely high arch palate. Intraorally, the uvula
is elongated. Faucial pillars are somewhat constructed. Tonsils are huge
and hyperplastic blocking off the oral airway. Intranasally, it is a
little difficult to see. There could be some hypertrophied turbinates
but difficult to tell. Nostrils are quite constricted. <PERSON> is
wide. He apparently has significant problems with snoring but claims no
time somnolence. He is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.

<PERSON> 09/11/2006 Page 2


Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars with the maxillary
ones erupted in. Mandibular left one is impacted and the right one
partially erupted through. The left mandibular third molar is impacted
and the right one is erupted but lying in a horizontal pattern. He does
have about a 1 mm anterior open bite. He has anterior and bilateral
posterior crossbites. He has about a 3 to 4 mm crossbite anteriorly. It
appears that the only teeth that touch are his right third molars and
left maxillary third molar and mandibular second molar. All other teeth
are essentially out of occlusion.

Waters view shows that he has a large septal spur off the left side that
appears to be completely obliterating that side of the nose. On the
right side, the turbinate looks severely hyperplastic filling the nasal
airway on the right side. Sinuses look relatively clear.


1.  AP maxillary deficiency.

2.  Severe transverse maxillary deficiency.

3.  Vertical maxillary excess.

4.  AP mandibular prognathism with some slight deviation.

5.  Class II cuspid on the left side, Class I on the right.

6.  Anterior open bite.

7.  Missing mandibular right first and second molars.

8.  Maintain third molars with the maxillary erupted and the mandibular
    erupted in a horizontal orientation while the left mandibular third
    molar is impacted.

9.  High occlusal plane angle.

10. Hypertrophied turbinates.

11. Nasal airway obstruction.

12. Severely hypertrophied tonsils.

13. Severe oropharyngeal airway restriction.

14. Narrow nostrils.

15. Wide columella.

16. Generalized decalcification of the teeth.


1.  Dental restorations and treatment to get the teeth in best condition
    possible.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics stage 1.

    a.  Place maxillary expansion device on the palate with
        consideration of placing foot extensions to set against the
        alveolar bone.

3.  Stage 2.

  a. Expand the maxilla approximately 20 to 25 mm.

b.  Align and level maxillary arch and align and level mandibular arch.
    Maintain mandibular right third molar as it is providing a vertical
    stop to the occlusion and maintain bone.

<PERSON> 09/11/2006 Page 3

4.  Surgery stage 1.

    a.  Maxillary osteotomies, separation of pterygoids plates and
        midline osteotomy to facilitate orthopedic maxillary expansion.

    b.  Tonsillectomy.

    c.  Maxillary expansion at a rate of about ½ mm, no more than 1 mm
        per day.

5.  Surgery stage 2.

    a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible
        backwards in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Partial inferior turbinectomies.

    d.  Possible nasal septoplasty.

    e.  Consider extracting maxillary third molars and mandibular right
        third molar.

    f.  Consider placement of osteointegrated implants x3 in the right
        mandibular posterior quadrant.

    g.  Surgical removal of impacted mandibular left third molar with
        possible removal of right third molar and maxillary third
        molars.

    h.  Nasal septoplasty.

6.  Posterior surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

7.  Restorative dentistry to place crowns on the implants in the
    mandibular right posterior quadrant.
