<PERSON> 06/06/2006

Date of Birth: 09/07/1990

Luke is 15 years old and is referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 5525 S.
Staples St., <LOCATION>. C, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>, 78411. <PERSON>’s primary concerns
affect his jaw growth because of the deformity in the right mandibular
condyle. There is no real history of trauma to the joints except when
<PERSON> was in the 4th grade he came home from playing basketball one time
and told his mother that his jaw hurts some but there was no indication
at that time of any serious injury. The family did notice some asymmetry
in the jaw alignment and took <PERSON> to see Dr. <PERSON> in 2002.
Dr. <PERSON> noticed the deformed condyle on the right side.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good facial symmetry in the middle and upper
third face. There is some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip
length is about 20 mm. Tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.
Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular
dental midline is 1 mm off to the right and chin midline is 4 to 5 mm
off to the right. Transversely, there is a cant in the occlusion with
the right side being higher by probably 2 mm in the cuspid area in the
maxilla and 3 mm in the mandible. In profile view, the maxilla is AP
deficient by 4 to 5 mm and chin is deficient by 15 to 18 mm. He has
basically a Class I occlusion with about 2 mm anterior deep bite
relationship. There does appear to be vertical overlap in the cuspid
area on the right side as compared to the left side. The uvula appeared
relatively normal. The soft palate may be mildly elongated and faucial
pillars may be mild to moderately constricted but difficult to visualize
because of limited jaw opening. On the left side the turbinate was
mildly enlarged but on the right side the turbinate was moderately
enlarged. The septum looked acceptable. There is mild to moderate nasal
airway obstruction. No history of snoring, daytime somnolence or sleep
apnea. To palpation she has no tenderness around the head and neck area.
On opening, both joints seem to function relatively smoothly. He says at
times he does get grinding noises in the right joint. Maximal incisal
opening is 28 mm. Excursive movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 2
mm. He does not have any problems with headaches. He rates his TMJ pain
at 1, average daily pain at 0, jaw function at 5, diet and disability at
0. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.


Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the mandibular
third molars. The maxillary third molars are impacted. There is a
severely malformed condyle in the right side that could be a result of a
previous fracture although there is no real strong history of that. The
left joint looks relatively normal. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Waters view shows that he has a septal spur off on the right side and a
rather large turbinate on the right side. On the left side it looks as
though the airway is open. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of
anterior beaking. There may be a little bit of sclerosis on the head.
Joint space may be a little bit thin superoposteriorly. Articular
eminence is moderately steep.

<PERSON> 06/06/2006 Page 2

Right TMJ tomogram shows an enlarged fossa and an enlarged condylar head
but short in vertical dimension. Towards the anterosuperior aspect,
there may be bone on close contact. The posterior joint space appears
adequate as does the posterior aspect of the superior joint space. On
opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are
AP deficient. The right side of the mandible is short vertically at the
occlusal plane as well as the inferior border. Oropharyngeal airway,
however, appears relatively normal.


1.  Right TMJ severe deformity.

2.  Right TMJ fibrous ankylosis.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

5.  AP mandibular deficiency.

6.  Increased occlusal plane angles.

7.  Transverse asymmetry with the right side being significantly shorter
    than the left side.

8.  Right TMJ pain.

9.  Impacted maxillary third molars x2.

10. Significant limitation of jaw function.

11. Deviated nasal septum and septal spurring.

12. Hypertrophied turbinates particularly on the right side.

13. Nasal airway obstruction.


1.  Hold treatment until the patient is 17 years old.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Right TMJ arthroplasty with probably temporal fascia or a
        cartilage graft.

    b.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance it, down graft it below the
        transverse occlusal plane.

    c.  Mandibular advancement.

    d.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars.

    e.  Nasoseptoplasty.

    f.  Turbinectomy.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
