B143

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B143 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 6 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is off to the right side about almost 2 mm as is the chin. In profile view, B143's maxilla is retruded by probably a good 5 to 6 mm. <PERSON> is retruded by approximately 20 mm. The lower third face appears elongated. <PERSON> neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. B143 is 5 feet 1-½ inches and weighs 105 pounds. Intraorally, she has got all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. There is some mild crowding the lower anterior arch. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva. She has some small tori on the lingual side. In upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on occlusion and probably good 5 mm of Class II. She has an overjet of about 4 to 5 mm. She appears to have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. She has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues all look relatively healthy. Facial pillars are mild to moderately constricted, at least the posterior fascial pillar is. Tonsils appear relatively mild to moderate in size. To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the medial pterygoid muscles and retromandibular area. Maximal incisal opening is about 40 mm. Excursion movement to the right 8 mm, to the left 9 mm. In the upper arch, she has an accentuated curve of Spee, and in the lower arch she has a reversed accentuated curve of Spee. The upper arch has an accentuated curve of <PERSON> of about 3 mm and the lower arch has a reversed accentuated curve of <PERSON> of about 2 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex taken last week at Dr. <PERSON>'s office shows that the third molars are absent. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. Sinuses look reasonably healthy. She has bilateral significant arthritic changes in the jaw joints with significant loss of condylar volume and with the condyles functioning out almost beneath the articular eminences. She has an anterior open bite of probably about 4 mm. Septum looks reasonably straight. Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight except there is a spur coming off the left side that appears to extrude into the left side of the nose. The turbinates appear moderate in size. Neither the left or right side appear to have an open airway. Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with significant loss of condylar volume. The articular eminence is also quite flat. The condyle is functioning forward in the fossa and functioning almost beneath the articular eminence, but not quite there. The vertical height of the condyle ramus area appears quite short. Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows an articular eminence that is fairly flat. The condyle is functioning forward beneath the articular eminence almost. There is very minimal joint space present. There is increased posterior joint space seen on both sides bilaterally. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyles in a forward direction. Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that B143 has a retruded maxilla and mandible and an anterior open bite. She also has an anterior maxillary vertical excess. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm and at the base of the tongue is less than 5 mm. She has a little bit of adenoid tissue still remaining in the nasopharynx, but does not appear to be causing any nasal airway obstruction.

<LOCATION> severe condylar resorption and articular disc anteriorly dislocated with severe degenerative changes rendering them nonsalvageable. Severe anterior mandibular hypoplasia.
AP maxillary hypoplasia and posterior vertical hypoplasia.
Anterior maxillary vertical hyperplasia.
AP microgenia. Anterior mandibular excessive height. High occlusal plane angle. Class II occlusion.
Anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm.
Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and a reversed accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.

Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. In the upper arch, it would be helpful to align the teeth to 2 different occlusal plane levels by placing a small step in the upper arch wire between the cuspids and laterals to elevate the four incisors in a slightly elevated plane. Tip the lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to extrude the lower 4 incisors vertically about 1 to 2 mm to help correct the reversed curve of Spee. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
<LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly, posterior aspect inferiorly, as well as correct any vertical discrepancies and transverse discrepancies that may be present. Fat graft to bilateral TMJs (harvest from the abdomen).
Anterior mandibular vertical reduction and AP augmentation. Left nasal partial turbinectomy.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B143 MRI AGE: 21/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost volume vertically as well as mediolaterally. There appears to be decreased joint space vertically. There appears to be fluid in the superior joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There appears to be disc tissue displaced anteriorly.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume, but not quite to the extent as the opposite side. There is some fluid in joint spaces. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. It is difficult to identify discal tissue, although there may be some anterior.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume. The condyle appears somewhat elongated mediolaterally. The articular eminence is moderately shallow. There is discal tissue anterior to the condyle, but severely degenerated. Joint space vertically appears to be somewhat narrow in proximity to the articular eminence. The condyle appears to be postured slightly forward in the fossa. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle, but the remnant of the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The remainder of the disc is severely degenerated, deformed, and very small anteroposteriorly relative to the size of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost vertical volume, but anteroposteriorly appears to be perhaps slightly widened. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. There appears to be some remnant of the disc anterior and sitting beneath the articular eminence, but extremely short anteroposteriorly. There may be some inflammatory tissue posterior to the condylar head. On opening, there is moderate translation, but the remnant of the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

IMPRESSION: <LOCATION> severe arthritis with loss of condylar volume with disc displacement with severe degeneration of the disc rendering them nonsalvageable.

