<PERSON> 03-24-04

Darren is 39 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

Patient History

<PERSON> does have some problems with major depression. <PERSON> otherwise
is in good health except for severe sleep apnea problems.

<PERSON> has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing
loss. No joints give him problems at all. He doesn’t clench or grind his
teeth. No headaches, no TMJ pain, and no myofascial pain. He rates his
jaw function and diet at 0. <PERSON> reports that he has been in hotels
where he would be sound asleep and would be snoring so loudly that the
front desk would call to make sure he wasn’t having a party or creating
noise inappropriately.

Orthodontics was performed by Dr. <PERSON>, but he is deceased.

<PERSON> has problems with self-mutilation and has numerous significant
scars on his face, around his ears and neck area.

Current Medications

1.  Dalmane 50 mg q.h.s.

2.  Ambien 10 mg h.s.

3.  Klonopin 3 mg <LOCATION>

4.  Prozac 80 mg q.d.

5.  Effexor 300 mg q.d.

6.  Remeron 15 mg q.d.

7.  <LOCATION> 10 mg used for mood modulation

8.  Seroquel 400 mg used for mood modulation

9.  Tegretol 1000 mg q.d. also for mood modulation

10. Neurontin 2000 mg q.d. for mood modulation as well

Patient Concerns

1.  Severe sleep apnea problems

2.  Predominantly mouth breather

3.  Severe snoring

4.  Extremely tired during the day

5.  Snoring is so loud that his family can hear him throughout the
    entire house

6.  Extremely long episodes of apnea that can extend over 60 seconds

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.
Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on
the facial midline. <PERSON> appears to be about 6 to 8 mm AP deficient.
<PERSON> is probably 10 to 15 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is short, and
chin-neck angle is not well-defined.

Intraorally, he has had lower first bicuspids extracted. The rest of the
teeth appear very well aligned and leveled. Transverse width of the
mandible appears narrow. In the upper arch, he likewise has had first
bicuspids removed but has the rest of his teeth back through the second
molars present. Has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with a
little bit of a tendency toward crossbite on the right side. Has about a
millimeter of overbite and basically a Class I cuspid-molar
relationship. <PERSON> is relatively clear. Uvula is of moderate size.
Faucial pillars appear to be in appropriate position.

Intranasally, turbinates are somewhat enlarged. There is also a little
bit of redundant tissue on the floor of the nose. Does not appear to be
much passable airway. Holding the nostrils open did increase his
breathing abilities fairly significantly. Nasal septum is off toward the
left side and makes the left nostril a little bit smaller and more
constricted than the right side.

<PERSON> doesn’t have any tenderness around the head and neck area to
palpation. Joints seem to function smoothly. Incisal opening is about 43
mm. Excursive movement to the left is 11 mm and to the right about 10
mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Darren is congenitally missing three of his wisdom teeth and only has
his left maxillary third molar, and it is erupted in position. <PERSON>
has crowns on most of his upper teeth extending from the left first
molar all the way around to the right first molar. The lower teeth are
all natural with just a couple of restorations there. Sinuses look
clear. <PERSON> look relatively normal but difficult to tell on that
x-ray.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit larger with
maybe some anterior beaking. May be a little bit of decreased posterior
joint space. Articular eminence is a little bit toward the shallow side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and
fairly well centered in the joint with good joint spaces.

Open views show moderate translation of both condyles.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. He does have large
turbinates and some deviation of the septum off toward the left side,
although more posteriorly in the bony area it is centered. <LOCATION>
are of fairly significant size and appear to block most of the
functional airway.

Cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible appear to
be retruded. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm and At the base of
the tongue measures about 5 or 6 mm, but there is a double shadow there,
and in some areas in the double shadow the anterior part of that shadow
there is probably less than a millimeter. Tongue seems to full a good
portion of the oral cavity, although there is a little bit of space
superiorly.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  AP maxillary deficiency

2.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

3.  AP mandibular deficiency

4.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with a measurement of 2 mm
    at the soft palate area (normal 11) and 5 mm at the base of the
    tongue (normal 11 mm)

5.  Severe snoring

6.  Daytime somnolence

7.  Severe apneic episodes of greater than 60 seconds

8.  Missing all four first bicuspids and bilateral mandibular third
    molars and maxillary right third molar (left maxillary third molar
    retained)

9.  Malaligned maxillary left third molar and a nonfunctioning tooth

10. Hypertrophied turbinates

11. Nasal septal deviation

12. Nasal airway obstruction

13. Hypertrophied soft palate and uvula

Recommended Treatment

  Surgery

A.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward 8 mm at the
    incisal edge and downgraft it 4 mm posteriorly

B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a
    counterclockwise direction with the chin point coming forward 15 mm

C.  Partial turbinectomies

D.  Septoplasty

E.  Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars

F.  Extract maxillary left third molar

G.  UPPP procedure with lateral inversion flaps
