<PERSON> 10/03/2007

<PERSON> is 42 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>.


1.  Throbbing and numbing on the right side of the jaw.

2.  Severe pain in the right TMJ area.

3.  Snoring.

<PERSON> has no trouble with headaches. He says his TMJ pain can easily
escalate to a 10. His pain is worse in the evenings. Average daily pain
is about a 9 although he does not have it every single day but when he
gets the pain it is at that level. He rates his jaw function and diet at
3 and disability at 7. <PERSON> gets occasional numbness in the lower right
lip, cheek and chin area.

<PERSON>'s problems began in December 2005 of no known reason. It started
with a ringing of the ear and then proceeded in the more severe pain
mode that he now gets. The only medication he takes is Aleve. He says he
has had no other treatment for it. He does not have any trouble with
earaches but gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo. The only
other joint that is a little bit bothersome is his right shoulder. He is
aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime and also during the day. He
had an adverse reaction to etodolac.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 28 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is –4.
Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial
midline. In profile view, <PERSON> has fairly good balance between the upper
lip, cheeks and nose. <PERSON> appears significantly retruded by probably
about 20 mm. Chin-neckline flows directly into the neckline.
Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back through the second molars.
Transverse width of the lower arch appears narrow. He has some
significant crowding in the lower anterior arch. He has good attached
gingiva present. Slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. In
the upper arch, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back through the second molars.
He has basically a Class I cuspid relationship with just a slight Class
II tendency. He has tendency towards a cross bite on one side but it is
not in a full crossbite. He has a slight reverse curve of <PERSON>
particularly in the bicuspid areas. The transverse occlusal plane is
fairly level. He has an anterior open bite of 2 mm. Oropharyngeal
tissues appear relatively normal and healthy. The uvula is moderate to
severe hyperplastic. The soft palate is moderately elongated. Faucial
pillars are mildly constricted. Tonsils look relatively normal.
Difficult to evaluate the turbinates but they may be somewhat enlarged.
The septum appears reasonably straight. Holding the nostril open on the
right side significantly improved <PERSON>'s ability to breathe through that
side of the nose. On the left side it helps some but not as
significantly as the right side. There maybe some constricture of the
luminal valve particularly on the right side of the nose. To palpation,
he has some high moderate pain over the TMJs and mild pain over the
right masseter, right styloid and right SCM. The joint seems to function
reasonably smoothly. Incisal opening is about 49 mm. Excursive movements
are about 11 mm in each direction.


Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary right third molar. The
other third molars are absent. Sinuses look relatively clear. The right
condyle appears to have a little bump on it.

<PERSON> 10/03/2007 Page 2

There may be a little flattening on the anterior aspect. The left
condyle appears a little bit smaller than the right side.

Waters view shows that the turbinates appear fairly large. The sinuses
appear relatively clear. He has huge frontal sinuses that appear clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology and
there is a significant joint space present. Articular eminence is
moderately steep. Joint space looks very well balanced.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also has fairly good morphology.
Articular eminence on this side appears significantly steeper than the
opposite and a little bit longer in length. The joint space likewise
looks very well balanced. On opening, there is some fairly good
translation of the condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has some AP mandibular
deficiency, posterior vertical maxillary deficiency, high occlusal plane
angle with significant overjet of about 4 mm with an open bite of
probably at least 3 mm. Oropharyngeal airway looks suprisingly large
with AP dimension at the soft palate level of about 12 mm and at the
base of the tongue about 14 mm or so. He has a head postured forward
neck position.

Dental model analysis shows that there is significant crowding in the
lower anterior arch and some mild crowding of upper anterior arch. There
is an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. The lower arch is a
little bit more flat. There is a slight Class II end-on cuspid
relationship of about 2 mm. Transverse width of the arch is quite
constricted.


1.  Slight AP maxillary deficiency.

2.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

3.  AP mandibular deficiency.

4.  Slight Class II end-on occlusion.

5.  Anterior open bite.

6.  High occlusal plane angle.

7.  <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc dislocations.

8.  TMJ pain, right side worse than the left side.

9.  Myofascial pain.

10. Hypertrophied turbinates.

11. Partial nasal airway obstruction.

12. Impacted maxillary left third molar.

13. Hyperplastic uvula.

14. Severe snoring.

15. Nocturnal clenching and bruxism not controlled by splint therapy.

<PERSON> 10/03/2007 Page 3


1.  Medications.

    a.  Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. to help control chronic clenching and
        bruxism.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Try to expand the lower arch
        somewhat to keep from flaring the incisors too far forward.
        Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing no more than 2 mm
        of tooth structure.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior
        aspect, expand and advance slightly.

    d.  Bilateral partial turbinectomies.

    e.  Uvulectomy.

    f.  Surgical removal of impacted maxillary left third molar.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
