<PERSON> 04/20/2009

Becky is 24 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 3955 <PERSON>
Avenue, Suite 100, <LOCATION>, MO 63125. <PERSON>’s TMJ problems began she
was about 14 years in 1999. Prior to that, she had orthodontics from the
third grade and had treatment for about 2 years. She had splint therapy
from about 2002 to 2004, but not continuously. Orthodontics was repeated
in 2004 through 2006 without relief. She has recently gotten a new
splint in March 2009 to help keep her from clenching at night.
Medications she currently takes are birth control pill, Advil, Tylenol,
and ibuprofen, etc.

Becky rates her TMJ pain at a level of 10, average daily pain around the
head and neck area at 10 predominantly in the neck area. She rates her
jaw function at 5, diet at 6, disability at 4. She gets occasional
earaches, occasional tinnitus, and she does get vertigo. She is very
much aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and this causes her to
wake up with significant pain in the mornings. She also clenches and
bruxes during the day. Joints that bother her include her shoulders,
right worse than left, elbows, right ankle, and neck. She has no known
allergies to jewelry. She had an adverse reaction to Keflex when she was
younger.

Becky feels that her occlusion is slowly but continuously changing.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary, mandibular, and
chin midline are all pretty on the facial midline. The nasal tip is just
slightly to the left side about 2 mm. In profile, the lower third face
appears somewhat elongated. The chin neckline is short, although the
chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. She has a head postured neck
position. The maxilla is retruded about 3 mm. The mandible is retruded
about 8 mm. She has a lip incompetence of about 6 mm. Intraorally, <PERSON>
has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x
3 retainer on the lingual side. She has adequate attached gingiva in the
lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back
through the second molars. She has an inferior open bite of about 2 mm.
She is probably 5 mm Class III bilaterally. She occludes on only her
first and second molars. In centric relation, she occludes only on the
left second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion. With a
little bit more force, then the right side will touch in the second
molar area. Actually, in centric relation, she occludes only on the left
first molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion including at least
1-2 mm open bite posteriorly on the right side. Actually, in her centric
relation, the mandible is deviated off towards to the left side at the
dental midline about 1 mm and in the chin area bout 2 mm. Transversely,
the maxilla appears level. Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and
healthy. Intranasally, the turbinates appear maybe mildly to moderately
enlarged, but not too significant. There does not appear to be any
significant nasal airway obstruction. She has no problems with snoring,
but has probably mild daytime somnolence, but no sleep apnea. She does
not sleep well at night mainly because she wakes up with grinding of her
teeth and with pain and discomfort. She believes that she is
predominantly a nasal breather. To palpation, she has no real
significant pain around the head and neck area. Maximum opening is about
47 mm, opening without discomfort 32 mm. Excursion movement to the right
about 12 mm and the to the left 9 mm. On opening, she does deviate
towards the left side bout 3-4 mm. In the right joint on opening, she
would initially have a pop in that joint and then it would be smooth
after that. On excursion movements, she would have some glitches in the
right joint. The left side functions smoothly. Sometimes in the morning,
she will wake up with a closed lock situation that is predominantly on
the right side and she will have to manipulate her jaws and she will get
a pop and then the jaw opens adequately. At one point, <PERSON> was placed
on tetracycline to try to identify if there was a reactive arthritis
present. Apparently, one of the tablets got caught in her esophagus and
created an ulcer which required hospitalization for treatment

I-CAT EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of a horizontally impacted
mandibular right third molar, but all other third molars are absent.
Sinuses look clear. Right turbinate appears enlarged. Left joint appears
some arthritic as compared to the right side.

Coronal view shows that the right turbinate does appear quite large.
Sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows that the right turbinate appears enlarged.

Left TMJ tomogram sagittal view shows condyle that appears to have some
erosive changes and loss of vertical volume. Articular eminence looks
relatively flat. It is extremely flat compared to the opposite side.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is flattened anteriorly and
may actually have an erosive lesion in the anterior head as well. The
condylar head has more of a hockey stick shape as compared to the
opposite side. Articular eminence is significantly steeper in this side
than the opposite side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is significant loss of vertical
volume. In some areas, there appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact
with significantly decreased vertical joint space. There is some lateral
beaking of the lateral pole of the condyle. The lateral rim curves
inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is relatively flat across
the top. Joint space looks a little bit better balanced. The lateral rim
of the fossa is fairly flat.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph has her postured forward with the
mandible not back in centric relation. Oropharyngeal airway at the base
of the tongue measures about 5 mm and at the soft palate level measures
about 6.5 mm. She has an anterior open bite, but in this x-ray she is
postured forward.


1.  Left TMJ resorptive arthritis with articular disc dislocation
    without reduction and significant deformation.

2.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with
    occasional reduction.

3.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

4.  Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia.

5.  Occluding only on the left first molars with all other teeth out of
    occlusion.

6.  Anterior and right posterior open bite.

7.  Class II cuspid relationship.

8.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

9.  Severe TMJ pain.

10. Severe myofascial pain affecting predominantly the neck, shoulders,
    and back.

11. Difficulties eating and chewing.

12. Nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism.


1.  Medications: Klonopin 1 tablet q.h.s.

2.  Removal of mandibular right impacted third molar.

3.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing about 1-2 mm of tooth structure to correct for
        slight tooth size discrepancy.

4.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

5.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction with mandibular advancement and TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, down graft
        it slightly posteriorly, and expand.

    c.  <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    d.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

6.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


1.  Medications: Klonopin 1 tablet q.h.s.

2.  Surgery Stage 1.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and supposition with
        Mitek anchors.

    b.  Surgical removal of impacted mandibular right third molar.

3.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing about 1-2 mm of tooth structure to correct for
        slight tooth size discrepancy.

4.  Surgery Stage 2.

    a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, down graft
        it slightly posteriorly, and expand.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
