<PERSON> 07-07-04

Jhon is 15 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 5525 Staples,
Bldg. C, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.

Patient History

Jhon has had previous surgery including a transplant of the hip bone to
the alveolar cleft by Dr. <PERSON> in 1999. Otherwise he is in good
health. Takes no medications. Has no known allergies. <PERSON> was born with
a unilateral left cleft lip and palate. He had the lip and palate
repaired in infancy.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about -5 mm. Transverse width from commissure to commissure is slightly
less than 30 mm.

In profile view, with an increased freeway space to where his lips would
start to separate, he has good AP projection of the mandible. <PERSON>
appears AP deficient. Perinasal areas appear deficient. The tip of the
nose appears to have ptosis. Upper lip appears retruded. When <PERSON> bites
together all the way, he is overclosed vertically, and the mandible
becomes a little bit more prominent anteroposteriorly.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second
molars except he is missing the left second bicuspid as that tooth never
developed. He has a spacer in that area. Has mamelons on the lower
incisors. Has very thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior
teeth.

In the upper arch, he is missing the left bicuspid and right first
bicuspid and left lateral incisor. <PERSON> has a severe Class III
malocclusion. When he bites together he occludes only the maxillary
first molars and mandibular second molars. All other teeth are out of
occlusion. <PERSON> has a repaired soft palate. Faucial pillars come to a
pyramid apex at the soft palate. May have some VPI but difficult to
tell. Seems to have reasonable function of the soft palate musculature.
<PERSON> appears clear.

<PERSON> has severe deviation of the nasal septum off toward the left side.
Cannot see the turbinate on the left side. Turbinate on the right side
appears relatively normal in size.

TMJs seem to function smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars. Missing
maxillary first bicuspids and left lateral incisor. Nasal septum is
deviated off toward the left side. Sinuses appear relatively clear.
Missing mandibular left second bicuspid but with a space maintainer in
position. Condylar head and necks look slightly elongated. He has a high
mandibular plane angle and decreased posterior vertical mandibular
height.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly normal architecture.
May have some elongation of the condylar head and neck area. Articular
eminence is relatively shallow. Joint space looks a little bit narrow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular
eminence is shallow. Joint space is a little bit better identifiable on
this side although still is somewhat thin superiorly.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Severe septal deviation
off toward the left side with a huge septal spur that appears to be
obliterating most of the airway on the left side. On the right side, the
airway does not look very clear, and this could be due to perhaps the
turbinate being large particularly toward the posterior aspect of the
nose.

Cephalometrically, he has a relatively high occlusal plane angle and a
high mandibular plane angle. Severe Class III jaw relationship. From an
occlusal standpoint, the maxilla is almost 20 mm AP deficient.
Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Repaired unilateral left cleft lip and palate

2.  Severe AP maxillary deficiency

3.  Severe vertical maxillary deficiency

4.  Mandibular prognathism

5.  Super Class III cuspid relationship

6.  Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites

7.  Missing maxillary left lateral incisor, first bicuspid, right first
    bicuspid and mandibular left second bicuspid with space maintainer
    present

8.  Increased curve of Wilson, lower arch

9.  Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars

10. Severely deviated nasal septum and nasal spurring

11. Decreased nasal airway on the left side

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Try to maintain current
        maxillary midline

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Maintain the space in the lower
        left second bicuspid

2.  Re-evaluate to be sure that growth is complete

3.  Surgery

    A.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 10 mm
        and downgraft it 10 mm

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in
        a counterclockwise direction

    C.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4

    D.  Nasal septoplasty

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

5.  Restorative dentistry to recontour maxillary left cuspid to function
    as a lateral incisor
