<PERSON> 01/06/2006

Andy is 22 years old and is referred by Dr. <PERSON>, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.
<PERSON>'s original orthodontist was Dr. <PERSON>. He has had some
previous eye surgery to remove an ulcer but other than that he has had
no other surgeries and is in good health with no major medical problems.

PRIMARY CONCERNS

1.  Lower jaw is in front of the upper jaw.

2.  Teeth do not fit together very well.

3.  Back teeth in the upper jaw are erupting in too far.

4.  Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.

5.  Difficulties breathing through the nose.

6.  Predominately a mouth breather.

<PERSON> has no problems with earaches, vertigo or hearing loss and is not
aware of clenching or bruxism. He does get occasional tinnitus. He gets
occasional problems with his knees and his left ankle has been bothering
him since he injured it last May. He has no known allergies except to
dust. No headaches, no TMJ pain, no pain around the head and neck area.
He rates his jaw function at 1, diet at 0 and disability at 0.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip
length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 3 mm.
Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial
midline. In profile view, <PERSON> has a little bit of deficiency in the
subnasale and a little fullness in the upper lip and lower lip. <PERSON> may
be just slightly AP deficient but probably not too significantly. <PERSON>
neckline and chin neck angle are well defined. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all
of his lower teeth back through his second molars present. He is
actually missing two lower central incisors. He has significant
transverse deficiency in the lower arch. He is missing the lower lateral
incisors bilaterally. In the upper arch he has all of his teeth back
through the second molars. Both the second molars are hypererupted by
probably down below the first molars. He has a Class II occlusal
tendency. He has an anterior crossbite. The lower first bicuspids are
used as the cuspids and these are fairly close to being Class I. If the
cuspids are used as cuspids then these have full, almost a super Class
III relationship. He has about a 1 mm reverse deep bite relationship.
The uvula and soft palate appear relatively normal. Faucial pillars
appear moderately constricted. Tonsils are present. The septum may be
deviated a little bit off to the left side but not too significantly.
The left turbinate appears large and appears to be almost touching
against the septum. Right turbinate does not appear quite as large in
front but may be larger posteriorly. He has some constriction of the
luminal valves intranasally. He is not aware of snoring. He has daytime
somnolence, however, but is not aware of sleep apnea problems. He says
he tosses and turns a lot at night. It takes him about an hour to get to
sleep at night. He tries to sleep about 6 to 8 hours a night. It is
interesting by history <PERSON> states that he had a Class II jaw
relationship and then wore some elastics for awhile and the lower jaw
started to grow and it came out in front of the upper jaw but he was
kept on elastics for awhile even after that. <PERSON> is not aware of having
any additional growth of his jaws during the past 7 years.

<PERSON> Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and likely the lower,
probably the lateral incisors but could the central incisors that are
missing. There is hypereruption of the maxillary second molars. Sinuses
appear relatively clear. Left nasal airway appears more blocked than the
right side. Condylar head and necks are extremely long.

Waters view shows that the left nasal airway appears to be obliterated.
The right side may have some obstruction but not as significant. The
sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle appears large. Articular
eminence is moderately shallow. Not much joint space present. The
styloid processes are somewhat prominent.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint that has a little bit more space.
Articular eminence is relatively shallow. <PERSON> is relatively large.
Condylar head and necks are elongated. The styloid process is also
noted. On opening, there is good translation of both condyles with the
right side being even greater than the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a Class III
skeletal and occlusal relationship. Some overangulation of the maxillary
incisors. The lower incisors appear to be in pretty good angulation.
Oropharyngeal airway is very good. Except the base of the nose where he
has some adenoid tissue still present and it almost touches against the
posterior aspects of the turbinates. The turbinates are quite large in a
vertical dimension and the inferior turbinates are fairly large as well
and he has some clicks in his jaw joints as he opens and closes. This
could be indicative of the disc being out of place. To palpation, he has
no tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal opening is about 68
mm. Excursive movement is about 7 mm in each direction.

BASIC DIAGNOSES

1.  <LOCATION> disc dislocation.

2.  Bilateral arrested condylar hyperplasia.

3.  Mandibular prognathism.

4.  Maxillary transverse hyperplasia.

5.  Class III cuspid relationship.

6.  Missing two mandibular incisors.

7.  Transverse maxillary excess in a Class I occlusion by probably 6 to
    8 mm.

8.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

9.  Hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue.

10. Nasal airway obstruction.

11. Mouth breather.

<PERSON> Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT

Treatment Option 1

1.  Surgery stage 1.

    a.  Insert distraction osteogenesis device.

    b.  Anterior mandibular vertical osteotomy between the central
        incisors.

2.  Distraction osteogenesis following a 7 to 10 day latent. Expand
    approximately 8 mm.

3.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Open up spaces between upper
        lateral incisors and cuspids to make room for interdental
        osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Open up spacing probably
        between the two central incisors and cuspids to equal the size
        of the lateral incisors.

4.  Surgery stage 2.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible
        posteriorly.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct transverse
        discrepancies and upright the incisors.

    d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    e.  Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.

    f.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin AP
        and shorten vertically.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Treatment Option 2.

1. Presurgical orthodontics.

a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Open up spaces between upper lateral
    incisors and cuspids to make room for interdental osteotomies.

b.  Using <PERSON> appliances and technology, expand the lower arch and
    open up spacing 10 to 12 mm between the lower central incisors and
    the cuspids.

2.  Surgery stage II.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible
        posteriorly.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to correct transverse
        discrepancies and upright the incisors.

    d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    e.  Nasopharyngeal adenoidectomy.

    f.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin AP
        and shorten vertically.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

4.  Placement of osteointegrated implants into the lower anterior arch.

5.  Restorative dentistry to place crowns in the lateral incisor spaces.
