<PERSON> YOUNG 08/03/2006

<PERSON> is 26 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>. Her current
treating orthodontist is

Dr. <PERSON>, II, 158 Commerce Park Drive, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>
43008.


1.  Severe jaw pain.

2.  Jaw exhausts easily when eating.

3.  Severe neck, shoulder and upper back pain.

4.  Major difficulties eating and chewing.

5.  Difficulties opening her mouth and is unable to get necessary dental
    treatment.


1.  Allegra D b.i.d.

2.  Prevacid 30 mg b.i.d.

3.  Levbid b.i.d.

4.  Toprol XL 25 mg daily.

5.  Synthroid 0.075 mg

6.  Duricef 500 mg daily.

7.  <PERSON> patch 50 mcg q.48h.

8.  Actiq 400 mcg p.r.n.

9.  Kariva BCP.

10. Trazodone 50 mg p.r.n.

11. Promethazine 25 mg p.r.n.

12. Citrucel 500 mg b.i.d.

13. Percocet 5/500 p.r.n.

14. Vicodin ES 7.5/750 p.r.n.


1.  Surgery on her right pinky finger in 1994 for severed tendons and
    ligaments.

2.  Tonsils and adenoidectomy in 1998.

3.  Wisdom teeth in 1997.

<PERSON> has some problems with earaches, right side worse than the left
but no tinnitus. She gets frequent bouts of vertigo. Other joints that
bother her include her right knee, fingers and wrists but they are not
nearly as significant as the jaw joints.


1.  Irritable bowel syndrome.

2.  Hypothyroidism.

3.  Mitral valve prolapse.

4.  Fibromyalgia.

5.  Anemia.

6.  Possible chronic fatigue syndrome.

7.  TMJ jaw problems.

<PERSON> YOUNG 08/03/2006 Page 2

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left to right facial symmetry in
the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper
tooth to lip relationship is 5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty close to
being on the facial midline. Nasal tip is just slightly off to the right
side. Mandibular dental midline is on the facial midline. <PERSON> seems to
be deviated a little bit towards the right side perhaps 1 to 2 mm. Right
eye is a little bit higher than the left by probably 2 mm. In profile
view, maxilla appears to be retruded by about 3 to 4 mm and the chin is
retruded by probably about 10 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit short
and chin-neck angle is moderately well defined. She has a little bit of
ptosis of the nasal tip. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth
back through the second molars. A little bit of crowding and
malalignment in the bicuspid area and the central incisors. She has
basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship but does have the
crossbite on the right side and a crossbite in the second bicuspid area
on the left side. She has about a 1 mm overbite relationship.
Oropharyngeal tissues look good and uvula, soft palate and faucial
pillars all look relatively normal. Intranasally, the septum is deviated
significantly off towards the left side. The turbinates are moderately
enlarged. The muscles are somewhat narrow. She has some constricture of
the luminal valves. She is predominately a mouth breather day and night.
<PERSON> states that she has some mild snoring and has severe daytime
somnolence. She, however, does not appear to have any sleep apnea
problems. She does have difficulty sleeping at night. To palpation, she
has severe pain over the masseter muscles, styloid areas and shoulders.
She has high moderate pain over the left TMJ, moderate pain over the
right TMJ and SCMs. She has some milder tenderness over the temporalis
muscles. On opening, the joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.
Incisal opening is only about 25 mm. She does open fairly symmetrically.
Excursive movements are 6 mm to the right and 10 mm to the left. <PERSON>
does report that she has been running a low grade fever for about the
last three months. She has had increased swelling the last three months
or so of her feet and the hands. Her sed rate also has been elevated and
her sed rate did get up to about 62 and now has come back down to about
40. Her <PERSON> titer taken 06/15/2006 was negative. On 06/19/2006, her sed
rate was 62. Last check on 07/07/2006, it had dropped back down to 3.
She is anemic with a hemoglobin of 11.1, hematocrit 33.2. On more recent
sed rate she is back up to 40. She went to see two rheumatologists and
they both diagnosed her with fibromyalgia.

OTHER SYSTEMS: She has problems with wrists, fingers and knees. She has
an occasional urinary tract infection and nocturia times one. She has
had no miscarriages and no children. No endometriosis or ovarian cyst or
fibrocystic breast disease. She gets some burning, itching and dryness
of her eyes with allergies. She gets frequent sinus problems. She used
to smoke 1-1/2 packs per day for about 7 to 8 years but stopped about 7
years go. She has had problems with earaches, tinnitus and vertigo. She
gets frequent colds and viruses. She gets recurrent sore throats and has
some hoarseness that she thinks may be related to her medicines that
tend to dry her out. She has had pneumonia times three. She has problems
with nausea, irritable bowel syndrome with what she gets some abdominal
pain and cramping. She has problems with diarrhea and constipation that
alternate. Those problems are now fairly stabilized with the medications
she is currently on. I am not aware of exposure to Chlamydia. She does
have chronic fatigue and has been running a fever for the last three
months and she does have thyroid problems. She has mitral valve
prolapse. She has not had any exposure to birds or cats and has had some
dogs but there are basically indoor dogs.

<PERSON> YOUNG 08/02/2006 Page 3

No exposure to hoofed animals and no implants. She developed irritable
bowel syndrome when she was about age 9 years. She began drinking
alcohol at the age of 9 and then went through rehabilitation at the age
of 18. This may have exacerbated the IBS. She did have a rheumatoid
factor run in June of 2006 and it was within normal range. She has
significant problems with esophageal ulcers. She was told it was caused
by bacteria and yeast. She was treated with Diflucan and this caused her
ulcers to clear. Back in 2005 she was tested for H. pylori and she was
negative. Her C-reactive protein at that time was elevated.


1.  <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc dislocation with closed
    lock.

2.  <LOCATION> inflammatory process (rule out reactive arthritis
    versus connective tissue autoimmune disease versus bacterial/viral
    infection.)

3.  Vertical maxillary excess.

4.  AP maxillary deficiency.

5.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

6.  AP mandibular deficiency.

7.  Class I malocclusion.

8.  Crossbite on the right side and involving the left mandibular second
    bicuspid.

9.  Severe TMJ pain.

10. Severe myofascial pain.

11. Headaches.

12. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

13. Deviated nasal septum.

14. Hypertrophied turbinates.

15. Nasal airway obstruction.

16. Chronic clenching.

17. Irritable bowel syndrome.

18. Fibromyalgia.

19. Mitral valve prolapse.


1.  Laboratory tests.

    a.  Chlamydia serology (trachomatis, psittaci, pneumoniae.)

    b.  Mycoplasma serology to include genitalium, fermentans.

    c.  C-reactive protein.

    d.  IgA, IgE, IgG, IgM.

    e.  Immunodeficiency panel to include absolute lymphocytes, total B
        cells, total T cells, CD4, CD8 and <LOCATION> positive cells.

2.  Restorative dental work perhaps under general anesthesia to salvage
    all of her teeth.

3.  Medications.

    a.  Klonopin to control bruxism.

    b.  Consider anti-inflammatory medications (i.e., <PERSON>, Celebrex,
        <PERSON>, etc.)

    c.  Consider antibiotics (Levaquin, Zithromax, Cleocin, etc.)

<PERSON> YOUNG 08/03/2006 Page 4

4.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

5.  CT scan TMJ Concepts protocol.

6.  Surgical option #1.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchor.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to advance
        the mandible forward.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly
        and advance it as well as expand it.

    d.  Nasal septoplasty.

    e.  Nasal turbinectomies.

7.  Surgical treatment option #2.

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly,
        advance it and expand it.

    c.  <LOCATION> fat grafts to place around the prostheses (harvest
        from the abdomen.)

    d.  Bilateral mandibular coronoidectomies.
