<PERSON> 11/02/2009

<PERSON> is 17 years old. She is aware of the onset of TMJ problems
at about the age of 15 when she noticed clicking in her jaw joints. Her
joints no longer click or pop. She has no problems with headaches, but
she does have TMJ pain at a level of 6 to 7 per day and myofascial pain
at about a level of 6 that can escalate to 8. She rates her jaw function
at 6, diet at 6, disability at 6. She has no earaches, tinnitus, but
occasionally gets vertigo. The only other joints that bother her are her
knees occasionally. To palpation, she has pain at a level of 5 over the
temporalis muscles, 6 over the masseters, 6 over the shoulders, and 7
over the TMJs. The joints function smoothly bilaterally. Incisal opening
is 40 mm but only 23 without pain. Excursion movements are about 4 mm in
each direction. She is predominantly a mouth breather, particularly at
night when she sleeps.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, there is fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on
the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is 1 mm off to the
left as is the chin. She has lip incompetence of probably about 7 mm. In
profile view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by
probably 2-3 mm. <PERSON> is probably AP retruded by about probably about
6 mm. <PERSON> is AP deficient by about 15 mm. <PERSON> neckline is short,
although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. <PERSON> has an
anterior open bite of about 2-3 mm. She has a Class II end-on cuspid
relationship, being about 2 mm Class II on the right side and probably 1
mm Class II on the left side. It appears that she has a little bit of a
tendency towards transverse deficiency in the maxilla. She has a slight
transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being almost
2 mm higher than the right cuspid in the upper arch. Oropharyngeal
tissues look healthy.


1.  Bilateral TMJ AICR.

2.  Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia

3.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

4.  Slight Class II end-on occlusion.

5.  Anterior open bite of 3 mm.

6.  TMJ pain.

7.  Myofascial pain.

8.  Headaches.

9.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

10. Nasal airway obstruction.

11. Occluding only on the mandibular left second molar in centric
    relation.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction, down graft the posterior aspect
          and expand.

    d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
