<PERSON> 11/14/2008

John is 33 years old. Referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 2845 <LOCATION>, #100, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>. <PERSON> is in good health. He does have some
allergy prescriptions that he takes at times.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is about -4 or -5 mm. In profile view, he has fairly good
facial balance, but may have a component of bimaxillary protrusion.
Intraorally, he has all of his lower teeth back through the third
molars, but the third molars are partially impacted. He has some slight
malrotations in the lower incisors. The attached gingiva is fairly thin
in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he appears to have all of
his teeth back through the second molars present. He has a basically a
Class I cuspid relationship on the left side and a slight Class III
cuspid relationship on the right side. He has an end-on incisor
relationship. The upper incisors appear over angulated. Upper lateral
incisors appear small in size. To palpation, <PERSON> has no tenderness
around the head and neck area. On opening, the right joint functions
smoothly, but on the left side he has a click consistently at about 30
to 35 mm of opening and at closing the click is somewhere around 25 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of impacted
maxillary third molars and mandibular third molars that are at least
partially impacted. The sinuses look relatively clear. <PERSON> look
relatively normal. There is an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper
arch.

Waters view shows that he has large turbinates. He has what appears to
be a large septal spur coming off the left side of his nose. Sinuses
appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ appears to have reasonably good morphology and appears to have
good joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ is somewhat difficult to identify, but it looks reasonably
normal. There could possibly be some decreased joint space. On opening,
there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a bimaxillary
protrusion element to his occlusion. Oropharyngeal airway space is
slightly constricted at about 8 to 9 mm at the soft palate level and
about 7 to 8 mm at the base of the tongue. He does appear to have
Bimaxillary protrusion. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy.
The uvula may be moderately elongated. The soft palate look reasonably
normal as did the fascial pillars which could be just slightly
constricted. Tonsils are close to being normal or just slightly
enlarged.

<PERSON> does have some crenations on the lateral borders of his tongue
almost all the way around. Intranasally, he has moderately size
turbinates, but <PERSON> reports that he breathes through his nose
predominantly when he sleeps. He does state that he has some mild
snoring and some mild daytime tiredness.


1.  Left TMJ articular disc dislocation.

2.  Anterior maxillary protrusion.

3.  Anterior mandibular protrusion.

4.  End-on incisor occlusion.

5.  Class I cuspid on the left, slight Class III cuspid on the right.

6.  Maxillary vertical hypoplasia.

7.  Bimaxillary protrusion.

8.  Impacted third molars x4.

9.  <LOCATION>.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Extract the maxillary first bicuspids.

    b.  Align and level the maxillary arch. Close extraction space.
        Decrease angulation of the maxillary incisors. Can lose a little
        posterior anchorage, but no more than 2 mm.

    c.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure and retract to
        decrease the over angulation of the lower incisors.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
        Mitek anchor.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward, down graft
        it, and correct any transverse discrepancies.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to counterclockwise
        rotate the mandible and set it posteriorly.

    d.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

    e.  Reduction glossectomy.

3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

4. Restorative dentistry if the patient desires veneers on his anterior
teeth.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

a.  Extract maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids.

b.  Align and level the upper arch. Close the extraction space, but open
    space around the upper lateral incisors to equal 1.5 mm around each
    tooth to correct for the tooth size discrepancy.

c.  Align and level mandibular arch and close the extraction spaces.
    Loss some posterior anchorage.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
          Mitek anchor.

    b.  Mandibular left sagittal split osteotomy.

    c.  Consider reduction glossectomy.

    d.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

3. Post surgical orthodontics to finish and retain.

3. Restorative dentistry to include possible veneers to build up the
sizes of the maxillary 4 incisors, particularly the laterals.
