<PERSON> 04/01/2009

<PERSON> will be 72 in 3 days. I originally treated <PERSON> back on March 23,

1.  Right mandibular body osteotomy.

2.  Bilateral sagittal split osteotomies of the ramus to advance it.

3.  LeForte I maxillary osteotomies in 3 pieces.

4.  <PERSON> bone fixation and Chappy bone plate fixation.

Since then, she has done fairly well. <PERSON>’s current symptoms began in
about October 2008 when she began noticing significant grinding noises
in her joints and some pain and discomfort.

Clinical examination today shows that she is having no headaches and
does not really have significant TMJ pain except at times upon function.
She rates her jaw function, diet at 4, disability at 3. Incisal opening
is 35 mm. Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction. Gleason
action maintained itself fairly well with a good Class I with about 2 mm
anterior open bite. On jaw function, she has almost an audible
crepitation in both joints. To palpation, however, she is fortunate and
does not have significant myofascial pain problems. She has no trouble
with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. Other joints that bother her
include her finger joints with two fingers on each hand being primary
problem areas. The only medication she takes is thyroid medication and
vitamins. Another medicine she takes is called fisherman’s friend which
is a throat lozenge that helps prevent cough. The active ingredient is
menthol 10 mg. Intraorally, <PERSON> is missing the lower maxillary first
bicuspids. She has one lower incisor that the root was removed on it and
it is bonded her lower right central incisor and lateral incisor.
Oropharyngeal tissues look good and healthy. Upper lip length is 24 mm.
Upper tooth lip relationship is about 1 mm. Facial balance looks fairly
good. In profile, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4 to
6 mm and mandibular deficiency probably about 12 to 15 mm. <PERSON> neckline
is a little bit short.


1.  <LOCATION> severe arthritis

2.  TMJ pain.

3.  Masticatory dysfunction.


1.  CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).

2.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction with total joint prostheses.

    b.  <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    c.  Application and removal of arch bars.

This is the best option <PERSON> has to correct her severe TMJ arthritis.
This should allow her to regain normal jaw function as she is
significantly limited in her dietary aspect right now, and she has to
say pretty much on a relatively soft diet. She also has the pain factors
that would be significantly improved as well. We did discuss the
surgery, and she is anxious to proceed on with treatment and get well.
