<PERSON> 04/20/2009

Miriam is 18 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.
<PERSON> is in good health with no major medical problems. The history is
that <PERSON> began with orthodontic treatment when she was about 10 years
of age and has been in braces for 8 years. She recently switched to Dr.
<PERSON>, and he has taken off the old appliances and put on new ones.

1.  Teeth do not meet after 8 years of braces.

2.  Predominantly a mouth breather.

3.  Difficulties getting the lips together.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, upper lip length is about 20 mm.
Upper tooth lip relationship is 8 mm. The maxillary midline is fairly
close to being on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is
also close to being on the facial midline. The chin is shifted off to
the left side probably about 3 mm. The maxillary midline may be about 1
mm off towards the left as is the mandibular dental midline about 1 mm.
In profile, the maxilla is retruded by about 5-6 mm. <PERSON> is retruded
about 15-18 mm. The chin neckline is extremely short, although the chin
neck angle is fairly well defined. <PERSON> has a lip incompetence of
about 10 mm. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through
the second molars present. The second molars are actually tipped
lingually quite significantly. The rest of the teeth are fairly well
aligned. She has relatively thin tissues over the roots of her teeth.
The roots of the lower incisors cuspids are very prominent. In the upper
arch, <PERSON> has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She
has a Class I cuspid relationship by about 3-4 mm on the right side and
probably 1-2 mm on the left side. She has about a 1 mm vertical
overbite. She likewise has about a 1 mm overjet. Maxillary incisors
appear to be quite vertical. Right cuspid appears to be about 2 mm
anterior to the left cuspid in the lower arch. In upper arch, the right
cuspid is about 2 mm anterior to the left cuspid. The right maxillary
cuspid and the mandibular cuspid are about 2 mm lower vertically than
the left side. When smiling, <PERSON> displays about 5 mm of gingiva. The
oropharyngeal areas look normal. Intranasally, the turbinates are
moderate in size. The septum anteriorly is deviated off to the right
side and the right nostril area. She probably has moderate nasal airway
obstruction. To palpation, <PERSON> has no tenderness around the head and
neck area. Maximum opening is 55 mm. Excursion movement to the right 10
mm, to the left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. I-CAT: Panorex shows the presence of four
developed, but unerupted third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear.
<PERSON> appear a little bit small and it appears as though they have
lost volume. It appears there is a little bit of sclerosis on the head
of the condyles.

Coronal view shows the presence of hypertrophied turbinates. The septum
appears deviated a little bit off towards the right side. She has a
mucous retention cyst in the maxillary left sinus.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears somewhat small in
size and looks as though it has lost some volume. There is some anterior
beaking present and a little sclerosis on the top of the condyle. Joint
space appears decreased vertically. The articular eminence is moderately
shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears smaller in size
than normal. There is some anterior beaking present. There appears to be
a more normal vertical joint space perhaps on this side, but there is
decreased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is larger on this
side than the opposite.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears a little bit shorter
vertically than normal. There is decreased vertical joint space. Lateral
rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm. There is a little
osteophyte extending off the lateral pole of the condyle.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears to have lost some
vertical volume. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.
There appears to be decreased vertical joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a retruded
maxilla and mandible., but has vertical overgrowth of the maxilla.
Oropharyngeal airway appears quite constricted with an oropharyngeal
airway of only about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and about 7 mm at
the soft palate level. She has a high occlusal plane angle, but appears
to have fairly close to a Class I occlusal relationship. She has
significant lip incompetence and appears to have perhaps elongation of
the vertical height of the anterior mandible. <PERSON> has a tooth size
discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 4 mm. In frontal view, <PERSON>may have a little bit more fullness in the right side of the face by 2-3
mm as compared to the left side.


1.  <LOCATION> adolescent internal condylar resorption (AICR).

2.  Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia, but AP maxillary
    hypoplasia.

3.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

4.  Class I end-on occlusion.

5.  High occlusal plane angle.

6.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal
    11 mm).

7.  Sleep apnea symptoms including daytime somnolence and occasional
    apneic episodes.

8.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

9.  Impacted third molars x4.

10. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 4 mm.



1.  MRI of left and right TMJ

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space between
          the upper laterals and cuspids to help correct for the tooth
          size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and
          cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
          osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
          teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct
          for the tooth size discrepancy.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Multiple mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in
          a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance her maxilla superiorly about 6
          mm with a counterclockwise rotation.

    d.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.

    e.  Surgical removal of 4 impacted third molars.

    f.  Bilateral partial turbinectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors.


1.  MRI of left and right TMJ

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Open up 1 mm of space between
          the upper laterals and cuspids to help correct for the tooth
          size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and
          cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
          osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
          teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct
          for the tooth size discrepancy.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3.  Surgery.

a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advance with TMJ
    Concepts total joint prostheses.

b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla upwards
    6 mm and forward 6 mm.

    a.  <LOCATION> fat grafts.

    b.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

    c.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.

    d.  <LOCATION> partial turbinectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Restorative dentistry to build up the maxillary lateral incisors.
