<PERSON>

<PERSON> is 66 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>. She has had a
number of previous surgeries but none associated with the TMJ. <PERSON> is
in good health with no major medical problems. <PERSON> takes the

1.  Dyazide 3 times per week.

2.  Estradiol 0.5 mg q.d.

3.  Synthroid 75 mcg q.d.

4.  Trazodone 25 mg q.h.s. p.r.n.


1.  Snoring.

2.  Sleep apnea.

3.  Daytime sleepiness.

She has no TMJ symptoms or apparent problems. She is aware of possibly
clenching and bruxing some at nighttime, but she has been told that she
has that but she is not particularly aware of that herself. Previous
treatment includes orthodontics as a teenager.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. There is some slight extra fullness maybe
on the right side as compared to the left side in the angle area. Upper
lip length measures about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 1. The
maxillary midline is on the facial midline. The mandibular dental and
chin midline are all fairly well aligned with each other, but about 2 mm
to the right the maxillary midline. In profile view, <PERSON> is probably
a good 6-8 mm AP deficient in the maxilla. <PERSON> appears to be 10-12 mm
AP deficient. <PERSON> neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well
defined. She does have some prominence of the labial mental fold. Upper
lip supralabrale is about at least 3-4 mm posterior to subnasale.
Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. The mandibular right incisors are hyper-erupted. She has an
accentuated curve of Spee. All the teeth on the mandibular right side
appear to be elevated compared to the teeth on the left side. In the
upper arch, <PERSON> has all of her teeth back through the second molars.
She is missing what appears to be the maxillary left central and lateral
incisors replaced by a bridge. She has an anterior deep bite of about
probably a good 7 mm. She is very close to being Class I on the left
side but Class II end-on on the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look
relatively normal. Nasal airway looks reasonably good, although there is
some slight deviation of the septum but not too significant. TMJs seem
to function reasonably smoothly, although there are some noises that are
present. Incisal opening is 42 mm counting the 7-mm vertical overbite.
Right lateral movement is about 9 mm and left lateral movement 10 mm.
She has no myofascial pain to palpation.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars but the rest of the teeth are all present. She has crowns on the
molars in all 4 quadrants and root canals on a number of teeth as well.
<LOCATION> appear enlarged. Sinuses appear clear. It is difficult to
evaluate the joints.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. <LOCATION> appear quite
large.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates appear
quite large with the left side being slightly larger than the right
side.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show condyles that have a little bit of a
hockey stick shape to them; however, there does appear to be good joint
space. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with a little bit of anterior
beaking. Joint space looks reasonably good. Articular eminence is fairly
steep. Vertical joint space looks almost excessive.

Left TMJ coronal view because of the angulation is a little bit
difficult to interpret. There does appear to be decreased joint space.

Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows decreased joint space, but the rest of
the joint spacing is pretty good. <PERSON> appears a little flat across
the top.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has AP maxillary and
mandibular hypoplasia. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level
measures about 3 mm and at the base of tongue measures 4 mm.


1.  Maxillary AP hypoplasia.

2.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

3.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.

4.  Sleep apnea.

5.  Class II end-on cuspid on the right side and Class I cuspid on the
    left side.

6.  Anterior deep bite of 7 mm.

7.  Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.

8.  Crowding of the lower anterior arch.

9.  Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior
    to the left cuspid.

10. Snoring.

11. Daytime somnolence.

12. Hypertrophied turbinates.

13. Nasal airway obstruction.

14. Missing maxillary left central and lateral incisors replaced by a
    bridge.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Consider using turbos in the
          molars to open the bite to help level off the mid buccal units
          in the lower arch by extrusion of the bicuspids and minimal
          intrusion of the anterior teeth. Try to correct the lower arch
          asymmetry by shifting the right cuspid forward about 1mm
          and/or retract the left cuspid. Slenderize the lower anterior
          teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a clockwise direction.

    b.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance it approximately 6-8 mm at the
          incisal edge.

    c.  Partial inferior turbinectomies.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

4.  Restorative dentistry as necessary to complete the occlusal result.
