SOOBIN OAK 02/16/2009

<LOCATION> is 20 years old. She has had previous surgery in July 2008 for
turbinectomies, septoplasty, and rhinoplasty. She had her wisdom teeth
removed in February 2009. Soobin’s problems began when she was about 15
years old. She was in orthodontic treatment at that time. She had
orthodontics from the age of 14 to 15. She also had some trauma to the
face and apparently on different occasions she has been hit in the face.
Soobin rates her headaches at a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal
area. Her headaches occur daily. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average
daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 5, and disability at 8. She
has no problems with earaches or tinnitus, but does get occasional
vertigo. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night and also during
the day. She has no other joint involvement.


1.  Headaches.

2.  TMJ pain.

3.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

4.  Speech is affected.

5.  Lower jaw is retruded.

6.  Front teeth are apart.

7.  Facial asymmetry.

8.  Pain.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <LOCATION> has fairly good facial
symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 21 mm.
Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is
pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline.
The chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline as well. The
nasal tip may be just slightly off to one side. In profile view, <LOCATION>
has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks, and nose. <PERSON>
appears retruded and chin neckline is short with a moderately defined
chin neck angle. <PERSON> is retruded by probably about 12 mm. Intraorally,
she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are
fairly well aligned and leveled in the lower arch. She has good attached
gingiva. She appears to have some mamelons on the lower incisors. In the
upper arch, <LOCATION> has all of her teeth back through the second molars.
Soobin has a Class II end-on occlusion by about 3 mm. She has an
anterior open bite of about 3 to 4 mm. She has an overjet of probably 3
mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. Intranasally, it does appear she
has had previous turbinectomies. Septum looks reasonably straight. Less
anteriorly, I cannot appreciate any significant nasal airway
obstruction. Nostrils are somewhat small. To palpation, <LOCATION> has
moderate pain over the TMJs, temporalis, masseters, retromandibular and
shoulder areas and milder tenderness over the medial pterygoids and
posterior neck. Maximal opening is 32 mm and she could open to about 24
without too much discomfort. Excursion movement to the right 5 mm, to
the left 6 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Coronal tomograms of left TMJ shows some
evidence of condylar resorption and loss of vertical height. The top of
the condyle appears quite flat. The lateral pole of the fossa is fairly
flat. There is decreased joint space particularly at the lateral aspect
of the joint. The lateral pole of the condyle is significantly lower
than the medial pole. Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is
also has undergone some resorption and has some erosions in the top of
the condyle. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 to
3mm, a little bit more than the opposite side. Lateral pole of the
condyle is significantly lower than the medial pole.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows condyle that looks a little bit postured
forward and out of centric relation. The condyle is quite small
anteroposteriorly and appears to have undergone some significant
resorption. It is quite flat on top. Articular eminence is moderately
shallow. A little bit of anterior beaking is present. There is a
pseudocyst inside the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite pointed upwards.
The condyles are postured forward in the fossa. Joint space looks fairly
good. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Panorex shows absence of all four third molars. There is an anterior
open bite. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Bony septum appears
straight. <PERSON> appear arthritic, particularly the left side where it
appears there is loss of bone structure.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are still
present posteriorly of moderate size. There could be a septal spur off
the left side of the septum.

Axial view shows that the septum does appear reasonably straight and
sinuses are clear. <LOCATION> appear moderate in size, but a little bit
larger posteriorly indicative of perhaps a turbinectomy involving just
the anterior part of the turbinates and not the posterior part.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <LOCATION> has a high occlusal
plane angle and a retruded mandible. She is postured forward in this
x-ray so she is more retruded than it shows. Oropharyngeal airway
measures about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and 5 mm to 5.5 mm at the
soft palate level. When Soobin bites together, she appears to occlude
only on the second molars with all other teeth out of occlusion.


1.  <LOCATION> condylar resorption and articular disc dislocation
    without reduction with significant deformation and degeneration
    (possible AICR).

2.  History of multiple traumas to the face.

3.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  Slight AP maxillary hypoplasia.

6.  Class II end-on occlusion.

7.  Anterior open bite of about 3 to 4 mm.

8.  High mandibular occlusal plane angle of 20 degrees (normal 8
    degrees).

9.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal
    11 mm).

10. TMJ pain.

11. Headaches.

12. Myofascial pain.

13. Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring and daytime somnolence.

14. Occluding only the second molars with all other teeth out of
    occlusion.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Place a vertical step in the
          arch wire between the lateral incisors and cuspids to align
          the 4 incisors at an elevated level and to extrude the cuspids
          1 mm on the left and 1 ½ mm on the right side. Tip lateral
          incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room
          for interdental osteotomies. Place brackets on the second
          molars, but do not engage the second molars in the arch wire.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
          teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. Place
          brackets on the second molar, but do not engage the second
          molars in the arch wire.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a
          counterclockwise direction utilizing TMJ Concepts total joint
          prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction and down graft it posteriorly.

    c.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

    d.  <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    e.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin and
          further advance the suprahyoid muscles.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine and retain occlusion.
