<PERSON>

<LOCATION> is 20 years old and a junior at SMU. She and her family live in
<LOCATION>, <LOCATION>. She is referred by Dr. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, CO, phone

1.  Her teeth and jaws do not fit together properly.

2.  Her back teeth have never touched together.

3.  Only her incisors touch.

4.  Occasionally popping in probably the right joint. As she opens or
    yawns, the lower jaw seems to go towards the left side.

<LOCATION> initiated orthodontic treatment with Dr. <PERSON> in June 2008.
<PERSON> has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain. She has
no other joints that bother her. No earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good symmetry in
the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is 1 mm. The maxillary midline may be just
slightly off towards the left side about 1 mm. The mandibular dental
midline is probably about 2 to 3 mm off to the left side. <PERSON> likewise
is off to the left side about 3 to 4 mm. Mandibular dental midline and
chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other. In profile view,
the maxilla appears deficient by probably 4 to 5 mm. Progonion looks in
fairly good AP balance, although it does appear a little bit strong
compared to the projection of the lower lip. She has a nice length of
the chin neck angle, and the chin neck angle itself is fairly well
defined. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the
second molars. She has turbos on the mandibular first molars. She has an
accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. She likely has some
anklyosis of the teeth that has kept that from erupting normally. There
is some mild spacing between the lower cuspids and laterals and cuspids
and first bicuspids. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back
through the second molars present. She has a Class III cuspid
relationship on the right side by probably about 3 mm. On the left side,
she is maybe just Class III by 1 mm or so. She occludes only on her
central incisors and has an open bite all the way back posteriorly
occluding 4 to 5 mm on each side. In the lower arch, the right cuspid
appears to be about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. The upper arch
appears more symmetric. The left side of the mandible appears slightly
vertically longer than the right side by maybe about 3 mm. Oropharyngeal
tissues look relatively healthy. Fascial pillars may be mild to
moderately constricted. Intranasally, she has moderately enlarged
turbinates. The septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right
side. She has some mild to moderate nasal airway obstruction. She has
wide columella and narrow nostrils. Luminal valves look reasonably
normal. <PERSON> believes that she breathes through her mouth at night when
she sleeps, but not so much during the day. She has a tendency towards a
cross bite on the left posterior side and also anteriorly. To palpation,
<PERSON> has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints seem to
function smoothly. Maximum incisal opening is 45 mm. Excursion movements
are about 5 mm in each direction. <PERSON> has a tooth size discrepancy
with a <PERSON>’s difference of 3 mm. Transversely, the maxillary occlusal
plane appears fairly level, but the lower arch appears to be down lower
on the left side around 2 mm in the cuspid and molar area.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. All the rest of the teeth are present, however. There are turbos
on the mandibular first molars. Sinuses appear reasonably clear.
<PERSON> appear relatively normal. Roots in lower first molars appear
somewhat sclerotic.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight, but the
turbinates appear quite large. Sinuses look relatively clear. The left
side of the mandible is just slightly lower than the right side. The
maxillary midline looks pretty much on the facial midline, but the
mandibular dental midline is a bit off to the left side as is the chin.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that a condyle that appears to have fairly good
morphology and joint space looks fairly well balance.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is slightly postured forward in
the fossa. Articular eminence is moderate in steepness. Joint space
looks relatively normal except the posterior space is slightly
increased. On opening, there is better translation of the right condyle
than the left condyle with the right condyle coming out almost anterior
to the articular eminence, whereas the left condyle remains beneath the
eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a very low occlusal
plane angle in the mandible. In the maxilla, it appears a little bit
more normal. The maxilla appears somewhat AP deficient as does the
mandibular dentition, but the chin is strong relative to the lower
incisors. Oropharyngeal airway appears decreased in dimension. To
percussion, it is difficult to tell, but most of the teeth sound pretty
good, but could not really test the first molars because of the turbos
in position directly over the top of them.


1.  AP maxillary deficiency.

2.  Possible slight transverse maxillary deficiency.

3.  Mandibular asymmetry with the mandible shifted about 3 to 4 mm to
    the left side.

4.  Bilateral posterior superior open bites of 4 mm.

5.  Occludes only on the central incisors with an end-on relationship.

6.  Slight Class III occlusal relationship being worse on the right side
    than the left side.

7.  Lower arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior to
    the left cuspid.

8.  Possible ankylosed mandibular first molars.

9.  Depressed bilateral mandibular occlusal plane levels.

10. Accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.

11. Hypertrophied turbinates.

12. Partial nasal airway obstruction.

13. Wide columella and narrow nostrils.

14. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 3 mm.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Open 1 mm of space
          between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids to help correct
          for the tooth size discrepancy.

    b.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Continue to open up
          space on the right side between the cuspid and first bicuspid
          to advance the cuspid forward 1 to 2 more mm on that side.
          Keep bicuspid root tipped mesially and first bicuspid root
          tipped distally to make room for interdental osteotomy.
          Consider using a step in the arch wire to align the 6 anterior
          teeth at an elevated plane level and step down to the
          posterior occlusion and align the bicuspids and molars at a
          lower level.

    c.  Remove mandibular molar turbos right before surgery.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward 4 to 5 mm.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to advance the incisor
          forward, but clockwise rotate the mandible upwards posteriorly
          to close the open bite.

    c.  Mandibular right body ostectomy to remove the spacing and level
          the occlusal plane on that side.

    d.  Left body osteotomy between the cuspid and first bicuspid to
          level the occlusal plane.

    e.  Bilateral nasal partial turbinectomies.

    f.  Columella reconstruction.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

During her appointment with me, as I was talking about the surgery and
the potential risks and complications, she had a syncope episode and
actually passed out in the office. Her pulse and airway remained stable
without any alterations. She slowly came around and felt a little
nauseated. She leaned over and placed her head on her legs and within
about 2 to 3 minutes total time felt normal again. We dispensed with
discussing any further aspects of the complications. She will have her
mother call and I can discuss these factors with her.
