<PERSON>

<PERSON> is 12 years old. Referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 201 Enterprise
Avenue, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION> 77573. <PERSON>’s orthodontists are <PERSON>,
DDS MSD, and Dr. <PERSON>, DDS MSD, 17201 <LOCATION>,
<PERSON>, <PERSON>, telephone number is 281-486-5081.


1.  Predominantly a mouth breather with poor oral posture.

2.  Nasal speech quality and a lisp.

3.  Poor tongue placement.

4.  Gummy smile.

5.  Headaches.

6.  Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.

<PERSON> has apparently been diagnosed with ADD and takes Vyvanse 40 mg q.d.
when in school. She currently is not taking the medication. She has had
a previous tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy along with a turbinate
ablation, all performed in 2005.

<PERSON> gets headaches maybe twice a month in the right frontal temporal
area at about a level of 7 and these have occurred just within the past
2 years. In her information sheet, it was labeled as the left side, but
she is assured that it is the right side. She rates her TMJ pain at 2,
average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2, diet at 0, disability at 0.
She has no earaches, vertigo, or hearing loss, but occasional tinnitus.
No other joints bother her. She does clench and brux at night.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about almost 18 mm.
Upper tooth lip relationship is 6 mm. The nasal tip is probably a couple
of millimeters to the right side. The maxillary dental midline is about
1 mm to the right side. The mandibular dental midline is probably about
3 mm off to the right side and the chin is probably about 5 to 6 mm off
towards the right side. As she shifts her chin towards the left side
about 4 mm or so, it improves her facial balance. In profile view, she
has fairly good facial balance. She does have just some slight AP
maxillary deficiency of maybe 2-3 mm. The chin may be just slightly AP
deficient. The chin neckline and chin neck angle are fairly well
defined. She does have a slight head postured forward neck position.
Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars and some of them are just now erupting in, particularly the right
bicuspids. She has an accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and
she has a lingual inclination of the lower incisors. In the upper arch,
the maxillary right cuspid and left cuspid are not in currently. She has
some bands on the upper first molars. There is an anterior deep bite of
probably at least 6-7 mm. She has slightly Class III on the right side
with a tendency towards a posterior crossbite. On the left side, she is
a little bit Class III as well. The Class III relationship is only 1-2
mm. She may have a bifid uvula. The soft palate appears a little bit
short in length and seems to function and elevate appropriately. The
fascial pillars look okay and the tonsils are gone. Intranasally, the
turbinates are huge and appear to be blocking the nasal airway
significantly. The septum appears reasonably straight as best I can see,
but I could see only the very anterior part of it. It appears to be just
a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being
1 mm lower than the right side. To palpation, she has some moderate pain
over the temporalis muscles and milder tenderness over the masseters and
minimal tenderness over the TMJs and retromandibular area. Joints seems
to function relatively smoothly today. Maximal incisal opening is about
4-6 mm, counting her deep overbite. Excursion movements are about 7 mm
in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of four impacted
third Maxillary second molars appear not to be erupted in all the way
yet and the cuspids have not erupted in. Sinuses appear relatively
clear. <LOCATION> appear quite large. <PERSON> appears reasonably
straight.

Coronal view shows that the inferior turbinates are huge and block most
of the nasal airway, but the sinuses are clear. The turbinates
particularly on the right side is fairly large as well.

Axial view shows that the turbinates almost totally obliterate the nasal
airway, although the sinuses appear clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows condyle with reasonably good morphology. It
appears there is a little bit of anterior beaking present. The articular
eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be decrease joint space
superiorly and posteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a joint that appears to have larger joint
space. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms shows that there is a decreased lateral joint
space where there appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact. There is
decreased vertical joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the
fossa that could indicate perhaps medial displacement of the articular
disc.

Right TMJ coronal view tomograms show there is decreased lateral joint
space. The joint space appears a little bit better balanced except for
the most lateral aspect of the joint.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has some slight AP
maxillary deficiency, but the mandible may be fairly strong. Tonsils and
adenoids appear to be gone. Soft palate appears somewhat short in
length. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5 mm at the base of the
tongue and almost 7 mm at the soft palate level. She does have a
reversed curve of Spee in the upper arch. Turbinates extend posterior
beyond the hard palate.


1.  Anterior and vertical maxillary excess.

2.  Slight mandibular prognathism.

3.  Slight Class III end-on occlusion.

4.  Facial asymmetry with the maxillary dental midline shifted 1 mm to
    the right and mandibular dental midline shifted 2-3 mm to the right
    and chin shifted 4-5 mm to the right and nasal tip deviated 2 mm to
    the right.

5.  Anterior deep bite of 6-7 mm.

6.  Unerupted maxillary left and right cuspids and partial eruption of
    mandibular left bicuspids as well as the maxillary second molars.

7.  <LOCATION> medial displacement of the articular discs.

8.  Mild TMJ pain.

9.  Headaches that occur at a high moderate level, but only 2 times per
    month.

10. Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the temporalis and the
    masseter muscles.

11. History of clenching and bruxism.

12. Bilateral hypertrophied inferior turbinates causing significant
    nasal airway obstruction.

13. Impacted third molars x4.

14. Predominantly a mouth breather.


1.  Consider bilateral turbinectomies to try to reestablish a functional
    nasal airway.

2.  Monitor facial growth and development for the next 2 years to
    determine if any abnormal growth is occurring.

3.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors roots
          slightly mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

4.  Surgery.

    a.  Maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly, correct
          the asymmetry, and correct any transverse discrepancy that may
          be present.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible
          back on the facial midline and advance it slightly.

    c.  Removal of 4 impacted third molars.

    d.  Consider any intranasal surgery necessary to correct any
          residual obstruction.

    e.  Possible TMJ surgery to reposition the articular discs and to
          remove the growth centers if asymmetric growth as a result of
          condylar hyperplasia is present in order to stop the aberrant
          mandibular growth.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
