<PERSON> 11/16/2009

<PERSON> is 18 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 701 Houston
Street, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION> 79072.


1.  Severe cross bite and underbite since the age of 4 years.

2.  Difficult to chew food properly.

3.  Jaw pops and hurts.

<PERSON> does not have any significant problems with headaches. He rates
his TMJ pain at 3, average daily pain at 2, jaw function at 7, diet at
0, disability at 1. <PERSON>’s TMJ problems may have begun about 4 or 5
years ago when his joints started to click or pop. He has been in
orthodontic treatment since about the age of 4. He has had 6 palatal
expanders and 2 sets of orthodontic appliances. He has had head gear x2.
The orthodontic appliances finally removed after 6 to 7 years in April
2009. <PERSON> takes no medications. He has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo,
or hearing loss. No other joints bother him. He does get some neck and
shoulder pain. He is not aware of clenching or bruxism. At night, he is
predominantly a mouth breather, but he and his family are not aware of
any problems with snoring, daytime somnolence, or sleep apnea.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good symmetry in
the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship appears to be about -2 mm. The maxillary midline
is shifted off towards to the left side about 2 mm. The mandibular
dental midline is off to the right side about 1 mm, and the chin is off
to the right side about 3-4 mm. In profile view, <PERSON> has some AP
maxillary deficiency of probably 6-8 mm. AP wise, the mandible also
appears to be deficient, but the chin is quite strong. The chin neckline
actually looks reasonably good. It appears to be a little foreshortened
vertically anteriorly. <PERSON> neckline is reasonably long, but chin neck
angle is not well defined. Intraorally, <PERSON> is missing the lower first
bicuspids. He has the rest of his teeth back to the second molars. The
lower teeth are in slightly more inclination. In the upper arch, he also
is missing first bicuspids. There is some spacing around the upper
cuspid as well as slightly between the lower cuspid and second bicuspid.
<PERSON> has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the right side being
probably 4 mm Class III and on the left side is probably 7-8 mm Class
III. He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites with the
crossbite being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Intranasally, the
turbinates are enlarged and the septum is deviated just slightly off to
the right side. He does have some moderate nasal airway obstruction.
<PERSON> is moderately wide. Transversely, the occlusal plane appears
relatively level. The lower right cuspid is about 1 mm posterior to the
left cuspid. The maxillary left cuspid is probably 2 mm posterior to the
right cuspid. He has a reverse deep bite of about 1 mm. He has a
negative overjet of about 7 mm. To palpation, <PERSON> has some mild
tenderness over the masseters and retromandibular area. On opening, his
joints seem to function reasonably smoothly, however, on excursion he
has a definite click in the right TMJ and <PERSON> felt he could hear
something in his left side as well. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm.
Excursion movement to the right is 6 mm and to the left 5 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of four first
bicuspids and all four third molars. It appears that the maxillary left
second molar is impacted and likely ankylosed. Sinuses are a little bit
difficult to evaluate. There is some spacing in the arches between the
second bicuspids, cuspids, lateral incisors in the upper arch and
cuspids and bicuspids in the lower arch.

Coronal view shows that he has a small left maxillary sinus. The septum
is deviated a little bit off towards the right side. <LOCATION>,
particularly on the right side, are large.

Axial view shows that the right turbinate is significantly enlarged, but
the left one appears a little bit more normal. Sinuses appear relatively
clear.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears a little narrow
anteroposteriorly and a little sclerotic on top with a little anterior
beaking, at least in one or two of the views. Joint space might be
decreased slightly.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit narrow
anteroposteriorly. It appears to be postured slightly forward in the
fossa. Articular eminence is moderately inclined.

Left TMJ coronal tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good
morphology, but there appears to be a decreased and particularly lateral
joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably 3-4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has relatively good
mediolateral width. Joint space on this side looks better than the
opposite side. Lateral rim curves inferiorly probably 3-4 mm. Lateral
joint space looks better on the right side as compared to the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has an increased
occlusal plane angle. He has AP maxillary deficiency as well as AP
mandibular deficiency but AP macrogenia. The mandibular body length does
not look too excessive. The lower incisors appear that they could be
just slightly over angulated. Oropharyngeal airway looks normal.


1.  Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

2.  <LOCATION> articular disc dislocations.

3.  Maxillary AP hypoplasia and asymmetry.

4.  Mandibular deviated prognathism.

5.  Class III occlusion, being worse on the left side compared to the
    right side.

6.  Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.

7.  Missing maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids as well as all four
    third molars.

8.  Impacted maxillary left second molar.

9.  TMJ pain.

10. Macrogenia.

11. Hypertrophied turbinates.

12. Nasal airway obstruction.


1.  MRI of left and right TMJ.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Try to shift the maxillary
          midline to the right 2 mm by opening up space between the left
          cuspid and second bicuspid. Keep the cuspid root tipped
          mesially and bicuspid root tipped distally to facilitate an
          ostectomy to remove that space, or if the space could be
          increased about 3-4 mm more, it may be adequate for an implant
          to replace a bicuspid tooth.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> high condylectomies and articular disc
          repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance it proximally 8 mm.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible
          onto the facial midline and correct the occlusal relationship.

    d.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to decrease the
          prominence of the chin.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    f.  Surgical removal of impacted maxillary left second molar.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Placement of osteointegrated implant if space in the maxillary left
    first bicuspid area is adequate to support a dental implant in the
    bicuspid.
