<PERSON> 10/20/2008

Jed is 36 years old, referred by <PERSON>, DDS, 702 <PERSON>,
Suite 108, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION> 75080. <PERSON> is in good health and has no major
medical problems. He has a family history of people having joint
problems and also sleep apnea problems. He has one brother who is on a
CPAP machine. He has one sister who has had orthognathic surgery in the
past.

<PERSON>’s TMJ problems began he was about 21 years old in 1992 while in
splints for the past 10 to 15 years. He also has had chiropractic
treatment for his back and his TMJ. He takes Advil and Tylenol for pain.

Jed rates his TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2,
diet at 3, disability at 7, and headaches which he gets in the temporal
and posterior head area at about a level of 3. The headaches have been
more intense particularly during the last week or so, and he usually he
does not have much trouble with headaches, although the TMJ pain is
there fairly constantly. He gets earaches, tinnitus, and has some
hearing loss, but this is likely due to previous ear problems where he
has had reconstructive surgery in his right ear x2 and his left ear x1.
Other joints that bother him include his right ankle, wrists, and
fingers, and he does have some back issues as well. He is aware of
clenching and bruxing his teeth at night time and also during the day.

He has moderate snoring, moderate daytime somnolence. His wife has
observed him with some apneic episodes. He has a moderate sleep disorder
and wakes up every 2 to 3 hours. At night time, he is predominantly a
mouth breather and also during the day as well.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right
facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 27 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is probably about 1 mm. The maxillary midline may be about
1 mm off to the l. The mandibular dental midline and chin appear to be
pretty much on the facial midline. In profile view, <PERSON> is probably 5 to
6 mm AP deficient in the maxilla. The mandible is probably 20 to 25 mm
AP deficient. <PERSON> neckline is extremely short, although the chin neck
angle is moderately well defined. The lower third face appears
elongated. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the
second molars present. He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior
arch. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second
molars. He is probably about 5 to 6 mm Class II in the cuspid area. He
has an overjet of probably a 7 mm. He has a zero vertical overbite
relationship. He has a cross bite tendency on the right side in the
first and second molar area. In occluding, <PERSON> hits only on the second
molars bilaterally and all other teeth are out of occlusion. <PERSON> did
have his wisdom teeth removed when he was about 18.


1.  <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc dislocations.

2.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

6.  Class II occlusion.

7.  High occlusal plane angle.

8.  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of
    3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm).

9.  TMJ pain.

10. Sleep apnea symptoms.

11. Hypertrophied turbinates.

12. Deviated septum with septal spur.

13. Nasal airway obstruction.

14. Occluding only on the second molars with all other teeth out of
    occlusion.


1.  Periodontal evaluation and treatment as necessary to maximize
    periodontal health.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially
    and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.

b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints if total joint prosthesis are
    indicated based on MRI evaluation.

4.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  <LOCATION> reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
          prostheses and mandibular advancement.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          if disc repositioning procedure is done.

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction and expand it.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    f.  Nasal septoplasty.

5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
