B368 
B368 is 23 years old and referred by Dr. .

In frontal view, B368 has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 4 mm on the left, 3 mm on the right. The nasal tip and the maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline. The chin may be deviated just a little bit off to the right side a couple of millimeters. He has a lip incompetence of almost 8 mm. In profile view, B368 has a retrusion of the maxilla of a good 6 mm and the chin is at least 15 mm AP deficient. Intraorally, B368 has all of his teeth back through the second molars. The teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. He has good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has springs between the upper laterals and cuspids to open up space there. When occluding, B368 occludes only on his left second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion. He has an anterior open bite of 2 mm in centric relation. He is vertical close to being a Class I cuspid relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left cuspid being about 3 mm lower than the right cuspid, but in the lower arch, the left cuspid is only about 1 mm lower than the right cuspid. Intranasally, the turbinates are probably moderate in size, but the septum is deviated off towards the right side. The right turbinate is larger than normal and it appears it blocks off a good portion of the airway on that side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. The rest of the teeth are present. There is space between the upper laterals and cuspids. The sinuses look relatively clear.

Left TMJ coronal view shows that he has enlarged turbinates. The bony septum actually looks fairly straight. Sinuses are clear.
Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side back in towards the anterior aspect of the maxillary sinuses. The turbinates appear enlarged and it appear that they were probably offering some constricture of the airway. It appears in the tomograms that he may have been posturing his jaw forward some. There appears to be increased posterior joint space in both joints. The joints have some mild arthritic changes, but nothing to significant. Articular eminences are fairly steep in both joints.

Coronal views show that there is decreased lateral joint space in both joints, but the vertical joint space appears fairly reasonably. It is possible there could be some medial displacement of the articular discs.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has an end-on incisor relationship. Oropharyngeal airway dimension at the soft palate measures about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue about 6.5 mm. In the x-ray, B368's lower jaw was postured forward slightly.

<LOCATION> articular disc dislocations. Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia but anterior vertical maxillary excess.
Mandibular AP hypoplasia.
AP microgenia.
Anterior open bite.
<PERSON> only on the mandibular left second molars and all other teeth are out of occlusion. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Hypertrophied nasal turbinates. Nasal airway obstruction. Sleep apnea. Continuous headaches.

1.	<LOCATION> MRIs.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. <PERSON> to align and level maxillary arch. <PERSON> to align and level mandibular arch.
3.	Surgery. a.	<LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors. b.	Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. c.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, expand it, and level the arch transversely as well as anteroposteriorly. d.	Augmentation genioplasty. <PERSON> partial inferior turbinectomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B368  MRI/BRAIN SCAN 
We were able to see the MRI/brain scan, and, in evaluating in the left TMJ, it appears that at least out laterally the disc is anteriorly displaced. The quality is very poor since it is not a dedicated TMJ MRI. There may be some osteoarthritic changes within the joint. The right TMJ shows what appears to be an anteriorly displaced disc and with some mild arthritis in the joint as well. It appears that the articular eminence is fairly steep and that the discs are almost in a vertical orientation within the joint spaces and particularly at the lateral aspect of the left joint.

IMPRESSION: <LOCATION> arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced.

