B374

Increased crepitus in the joints.
Muscle imbalance in the TMJ area and neck after the car accident 2 years ago.
Vertigo.
TMJ pain. Headaches.
Teeth do not fit together.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B374 has fairly good facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 3 mm. The maxillary midline is probably 1 mm off to the right side. The mandibular dental midline is a little bit more centered. The chin may be just slightly off to the right side a couple of millimeters. In profile view, B374 has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably a good 4 mm. The chin is retruded probably 10 mm. Intraorally, B374 has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. The teeth appear to be reasonably aligned. He has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he seems to have all of his teeth back through the second molars. He has a Class III end-on occlusal relationship on the right side by probably 3 to 4 mm as well as on the left side. He appears to occlude only on the maxillary first molar, mandibular second molar and hits about the same on the right side. He has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm anteriorly, but it is greater on the left side in the cuspid area and less on the right side in the cuspid area. <LOCATION>, the maxillary arch appears fairly level, and it appears there is a little bit of asymmetry in the lower arch with it being down about 2 mm in the cuspid area on the left side. He has some transverse maxillary deficiency with a tendency towards crossbite. He has a tendency towards a crossbite anteriorly and posteriorly. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Intranasally, the septum anteriorly is deviated off towards the left side. The left turbinate at least anteriorly appears relatively moderate in size and the right side appears somewhat enlarged. Maximal incisal opening is about 43 mm and he can get to about 40 mm without significant discomfort. Excursion movements are about 11 mm in each direction. In excursion, he is able to generate significant crepitation, actually being greater on the left side than the right side. Crepitation on the left side is worse if he protrudes the mandible some and then does the excursion movements.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc medially displaced. Right TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction with severe deformation and degeneration. AP maxillary hypoplasia.
Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
AP mandibular hypoplasia. Class III end-on occlusion. Anterior open bite of 3 mm.
Transverse cant of the mandibular arch with the left side being 2 mm lower than the right side. Severe TMJ pain.
Headaches. Myofascial pain. Vertigo.

1. Presurgical orthodontics. <PERSON> and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
b. Align and level mandibular arch.
2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
3. Surgery.
<LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and expand it transversely. <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
Bilateral coronoidotomies. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.
Nasal septoplasty.
4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B374 MRI AGE: 38/M
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
<LOCATION> coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. The condyle appears to have good morphology. The disc appears to be medially displaced. There appears to be decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears much smaller in size and more narrow mediolaterally. The condyle appears arthritic with some sclerosis on the head of the condyle. There seems to be reasonable joint space, but the disc appears to be a little anteriorly and medially displaced. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 3 mm.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. A little bit of flattening on the posterior head. Articular eminence is moderate in inclination. The articular disc for the most part appears to be in reasonably good position. A little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint space around the posterior aspect of the joint. On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and articular disc. At the lateral aspect of the joint in the closed views, the disc is not very evident, indicative of a medial displacement.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears more arthritic. The condyle is smaller in size than the opposite side. There is actually fairly good joint space present, but the articular disc is anteriorly displaced and sitting beneath the articular eminence. The disc is significantly deformed and short anteroposteriorly with significant loss of the intermediate zone. There appears to be an inflammatory process perhaps in the bilaminar tissue. On opening, there is moderately good translation of the condyle, but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction.

Left <LOCATION> partial medial displacement of the articular disc. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated anteriorly with significant deformation and non-reducing.

