B383 
B383 is 39 years old and referred by  .
Patient History

She has a history of occasional sinus infections, and she gets neck pain, and her hands can get numb. Dr.  is evaluating her for that. She had some nasal surgery 6 years ago. She had internal nasal reconstruction performed as well as work on her sinuses. 4 years ago, she had breast implants placed.

B383 is in good health.

Current Medications
Allegra
Rhinocort Aqua
Allergies
SULFA.
Patient Concerns
Clicking and popping in the jaw joints, worse on the left side as compared to the right side
Jaws get a very tired feeling Headaches Pain in the jaw joints
Soreness and pain down through the face, neck, and into the shoulder area
Clicking and popping in the jaw joint

Clinical Examination
B383 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 to 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular dental midline, and chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline as well. She only has three lower incisors, so the center of her lower dental midline is in the middle of the mandibular right central incisor.

In profile view, B383 has a very nice profile morphology. Chin-neckline looks normal. Chin-neck angle is well-defined. Vertical facial dimensions are in good balance.

Intraorally, she is missing the lower right lateral incisor but has the rest of her lower teeth. Appears to have good attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She is fairly close to being in a Class I cuspid relationship. She has an anterior deep-bite of about 3 mm. She has a quite constricted transverse width between the posterior faucial pillars. The posterior faucial pillars insert into the posterior pharyngeal wall creating some constricture of the oropharyngeal airway. Uvula has a relatively normal dimension.

Intranasally, she has quite large turbinates that seem to block most of the functional nasal airway.
To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the posterior neck area, styloid area, and moderate pain to palpation over the right TMJ. On opening, she had a definite audible pop in the left side at about 20 mm of opening and closing click there at 10. On the right side, she had an opening pop at about 15 mm and closing at about 10. It is difficult to identify the pop in the right side with the loud pop on the left side, but in loading just the right joint a little bit and not putting any pressure on the left joint, I could distinguish a pop on that right side at about 15 mm of opening and about 10 mm of closure. In excursive movements, she has definite pops in both TMJs. Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm and excursive movement to the right 7 mm and to the left 8 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the left probably lateral incisor. All other teeth are present. Turbinates appear moderately large. Sinuses look relatively clear, although the right side is a little bit cloudy. <PERSON> look like they have fairly good morphology with some flattening on the anterior heads.

Waters view shows that the turbinates appear fairly large. The sinuses appear relatively clear. Fairly good symmetry in the facial structures. Septum has a little bit of deviation to it.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is flattened on the superior head and has some anterior beaking. Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is quite shallow. Difficult to determine whether the disc because of decreased joint space could be anteriorly displaced.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep and significantly steeper than the opposite side. May have a slightly decreased posterior joint space.

On opening, there is good translation of both joints. Flattening on the anterior heads on both sides with significantly greater anterior beaking on the right condyle compared to the left condyle is noted. Differences in the prominence of the articular eminence is also seen.

Cephalometrically, she has a skeletal Class I jaw and dental relationship. Oropharyngeal airway measurements are about 5.5 mm at the soft palate level and probably 6 mm at the base of the tongue. The tongue is a little bit down from the palatal level only about 5 to 6 mm.

Basic Diagnoses
Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Relative mandibular hyperplasia
TMJ pain
Headaches Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the styloid areas and down through the neck and shoulder area
Hypertrophied turbinates
Nasal airway obstruction
Constricture of the posterior faucial pillars creating oropharyngeal airway reduction
Decreased oropharyngeal airway
Snoring
Recommended Treatment

Presurgical orthodontics Align and level maxillary arch Align and level mandibular arch
Surgery
Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw stabilization
Partial turbinectomies
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty

Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
Other Systems

B383  MRI Evaluation  
Left TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with fairly good mediolateral width. Some downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa but probably no more than a couple mm. The joint space may be slightly decreased. Appears to be discal tissue anterior to the condyle. <PERSON> appears a little bit flatter than the opposite side.

Right TMJ, coronal view, shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. Has less downward curvature of the lateral rim of the fossa compared to the opposite side. Joint space appears a little bit decreased. Difficult to identify discal tissue in this joint.

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Decreased posterior joint space. Articular disc appears to be anteriorly displaced sitting beneath the articular eminence, although there may be some compressed tissue at the superoposterior part of the eminence. Some mild anterior beaking. Significant amount of flattening on the anterosuperior head of the condyle. This may be acting as a wedge. The right TMJ articular disc appears slightly anteriorly positioned but does reduce on opening.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle, and it appears that the disc does reduce.
Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior head with a little bit of anterior beaking. Articular eminence is a little bit shallow on this side compared to the opposite side. More medially, the disc is more difficult to identify, but in the mid part of the condyle and toward the lateral aspect, the disc appears to be in reasonable position. Slight decreased posterior joint space appears to be present.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyle and the articular disc. No inflammation is particularly seen in either joint.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
Right TMJ arthritis and anteriorly dislocated articular disc with early reduction

