B414 
B414 is 53 years old. Referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

Blood clot 12 years ago related to Factor V Leiden. Migraines. Chronic fatigue syndrome.
Borderline high blood pressure. Sinus problems. Fibromyalgia.
Sleep disorder.


She gets moderate earaches, occasional tinnitus, and occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her knees, neck, and back. She is aware of clenching at night time and also during the day. She used to get the migraine headaches almost every day and that was up until just a couple of years ago. She has since been able to have better results with her medications and less headache occurrences.

In clinical exam, B414 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The midlines are all fairly well aligned with each other. In profile, B414 has fairly good facial balance. She has a little fullness in the submental area, but otherwise AP dimensions appear good. Intraorally, B414  has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. In the upper arch, she also has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. She has about a 2 mm anterior deep bite relationship. She has some slight over inclination in the maxillary incisors. To palpation, she has very mild tenderness over the temporalis muscles, but no where else around the head and neck area. Joints seems to function reasonably smoothly. Maximal incisal opening was 36 mm with about 5 mm of excursion movement in each direction. She does appear to have hypertrophied masseter muscles.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly displaced with reduction earlier on the left side and later on the right side. TMJ pain. Headaches. Myofascial pain being the worst involvement with the right masseter muscle.
Hypertrophy of the masseter muscles being greater on the right side than the left side. Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula. Significant constricture of the fascial pillars. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. Sleep apnea. AP maxillary and mandibular hyperplasia.
Chronic clenching and bruxism.

Sleep study. Consider medication alteration by elimiting the Xanax and adding in Klonopin 1 mg tablet q.h.s. to see if this helps with the clenching. Orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Align and level mandibular arch. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concept total joint prostheses. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla approximately 5-6 mm. <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen). Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP procedure).
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B414 MRI  
AGE: DOB:
Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some mild arthritic changes. There is a little bit of sclerosis and some slight anterior beaking present and a little bit of peaking on the top of the condyle, particularly towards the lateral aspect of the joint. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Articular disc is anteriorly displaced, more so at the lateral aspect of the joint and in a little bit better position medially. There is a little bit of fluid in the superior and inferior joint spaces. On partial opening, the disc appears to reduced. On wider opening, the disc is reduced. There is decreased translation of the condyle and disc. The condyle does not go beneath the articular eminence.

The right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears fairly narrow anteroposteriorly and a little sclerotic on the top of the condyle towards the medial side. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The disc is anteriorly displaced and thickened. The disc appears more degenerated on the this side than the opposite side. There is decreased superior and posterior joint spaces. There is significant fluid in the superior joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width. There is decreased superior and lateral joint spaces. The disc is anteriorly displaced.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has good mediolateral width. It is a little sclerotic in some areas. The joint space is decreased vertically and particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. The disc is anteriorly displaced. On the right side on partial opening, the disc remains anteriorly displaced. On wider opening, the disc partially reduces medially, but remains anteriorly displaced out laterally. There is decreased translation of the condyle and disc. The condyle does not go beneath the articular eminence.

IMPRESSION: <LOCATION> arthritis and articular discs dislocated with relatively early reduction on the left side and intermediate reduction on the right side, but both joints display decreased transitory movements.

