B498 

Clicking and popping in the left jaw joint. Pain behind the left eye and down through the right neck and shoulder area.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B498 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off to the right side, and mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin. In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm. The chin is retruded by about 12 mm. <PERSON> neckline is short and the chin neck angle is moderately defined. Intraorally, B498 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth are fairly well aligned and level. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars, however, the upper anterior teeth are tipped significantly lingually. She has some _____ in the palate. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relatively bilaterally being about 4 mm Class II on the left side and probably 2 mm on the right side. She has an anterior deep bite of probably about 6 mm. She has a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side about 1 mm higher than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Intranasally, she has an enlarged turbinate on the left side, but on the right side the turbinate is small at least anterior. The septum is reasonably straight. The columella is wide and nostrils are moderately narrow. To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the left TMJ, left masseter, and the posterior neck area. On opening, she has a demonstrable click at about 15 mm of opening on the left side and on closing at 5 mm or less. The right joint functions smoothly. After the jaw manipulations, she had burning in her left masseter muscle area in the anterior midportion of it. PREVIOUS TREATMENT. B498 has had previous orthodontic treatment from about age 34 to 36 including the use of head gear. Orthodontics was done by Dr. <PERSON>. She also has had splint therapy x3. With the orthodontics, she did also have head gear treatment performed. The head gear actually was used when she was a teenager at her first round of orthodontics.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
AP mandibular deficiency. AP maxillary deficiency. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. Class II end-on occlusion. Severe lingual inclination of maxillary incisors.
Hypertrophied left nasal turbinate.
Nasal septal spur obtruding the right nasal airway.
Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).
Left TMJ pain.
Left-sided headaches. Sleep apnea symptoms. Significant tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 3.5 mm.

Presurgical orthodontics. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary incisors forward opening at least 1.5 mm of space around each maxillary lateral incisor. Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
Align and level mandibular arch. Surgery.
Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. Reduction turbinectomy on the left side.
Nasal septoplasty.
3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
4. Restorative dentistry to build up the crowns on the anterior teeth to eliminate the residual spacing generated for the correction of the tooth size discrepancy.

B498 MRI 
AGE: 46/F
Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears fairly wide. Lateral pole extends beyond the lateral rim of the fossa. There is decreased lateral joint space. The disc appears medially displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.
Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is a fairly broad condyle mediolaterally. The lateral joint space is a little bit decreased, but not as much as the opposite side, but the disc does appear to be medially displaced. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly approximately 2 mm.
Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteromedially dislocated with reduction. Right TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc that may be slightly anteriorly displaced at the lateral aspect of the joint and also slightly medially displaced.

