GAYLE HOLD									04/12/2007

<PERSON> is 53 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 2830 <PERSON>, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.  She has had a previous mastectomy for breast cancer and she has had a previous hysterectomy.  She had about 15 surgeries in about an 18-month period that involved everything from the breast treatment and reconstruction as well as pancreatitis problems.  

    1. Nadolol 40 mg.
    2. HCTZ 50 mg.
    3. <PERSON> 75 mg.
    4. Neurontin 800 mg t.i.d.
    5. Relafen 500 mg 2 tablets b.i.d.
    6. Xanax 0.25 mg.
    7. Soma 325 mg 1 q.h.s.
    8. Ultram 50 mg 1 tablet q.h.s.
    9. Ambien 12.5 mg q.h.s.

<PERSON>'s TMJ problems began in her early 20s.  She had orthodontic treatment that included extraction of the lower central incisor and upper bicuspid extractions.  She wore a headgear to retract her maxilla back to meet her deficient mandible.  The orthodontics was done when she was 23 to 25 years old.  It was performed by Dr. <PERSON> and Dr. <PERSON> in <LOCATION>.  She actually did well relative to her TMJ symptoms until last October when she developed significant pain, but she currently has problems bilaterally but her pain is excruciating in the right TMJ area.  In February of 2007 Dr. <PERSON> made a splint for her and this does relieve some of the pain but then she cannot function as it interferes with talking, eating and just carrying on her normal activities.  On moving the joint, however, it did make her feel somewhat better.

She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain 6, jaw function 8, diet at 6, disability at 6.  She gets headaches in the frontal, posterior head and top of the head as well as the right temporal area at about a level of 6.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime and also during the daytime.  <PERSON> has been aware of clenching and bruxing since April of 2005 when she was diagnosed with breast cancer.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline, maybe just about 1 mm to the left.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 to 3 mm to the left.  <PERSON> is probably 2 mm to the left.  In profile view, <PERSON> has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 6 mm.  <PERSON> is retruded by about 15 to 18 mm.  <PERSON>-neckline and angle are essentially not present.  Intraorally, she is missing mandibular left, probably the central incisor.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has significant toothbrush abrasions particularly on the cuspid bicuspid area.  She has good attached gingiva.  In the upper arch she is missing the first bicuspids.  She has basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship that hits prematurely on the right side with a slight open bite present on the left side.  


<PERSON> HOLD				04/12/2007				Page 2

There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the maxillary left cuspid being probably about 1.5 mm higher than the right side but the mandibular left cuspid is probably 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the right side.  To palpation, she has moderate to high moderate pain bilaterally in the temporalis, TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs and the right masseter, right posterior neck and right shoulder.  She has significant crepitation that is audible in both TMJs.  Maximal excursive movements are about 36 mm, but only about 20 mm without significant pain.  Excursive movement to the right 9 mm, left 5 mm.  Significant crepitation is present with jaw movements.  Oropharyngeal area looks relatively normal with the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all within normal ranges with the tissues looking healthy.  <LOCATION> are moderately enlarged and may be causing some obstruction in the nasal airway.  <PERSON> says that she generally feels stuffy. 

Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary first or second bicuspids bilaterally and a lower left incisor.  All 4 third molars are missing.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  <PERSON> processes are calcified and elongated.  Difficult to evaluate the TMJs.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear.  The septum may be somewhat deviated back in the bony area.  <LOCATION> appear moderately enlarged.  Particularly the left side appears to be more obstructed.

Right TMJ tomogram is a little bit hard to read but it appears there are arthritic changes present and decreased joint space.  Articular eminence appears moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows some arthritic changes and decreased joint space.  Articular eminence appears a little bit flatter on this side.  On opening, there is a little bit greater translation on the left side and some restriction on the right side. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks suprisingly good.  Her cervical vertebrae are vertically oriented with essentially no curvature.  Upper incisors are retracted with a decreased angulation.  Moderately high occlusal plane angle is present.  Tissues are thin compared to the thickness of the lower lip and particularly the chin area. 

Dental model analysis reveals that she is missing a mandibular incisor likely the left central as well as upper first or the second bicuspids but difficult to tell.  Upper centrals are in a palatal inclination.  Lateral incisors appear small in size.  <LOCATION> both arches are narrow and constricted.  Articulating the models she is very close to being a Class I cuspid relationship but she has transverse maxillary excess compared to the mandibular arch with a tendency towards buccal crossbites.  There is maybe 2 mm of vertical overlap at the incisors on the right side and perhaps ½ mm with the left central incisor.  




<PERSON> HOLD 				04/12/2007				Page 3

    1. <LOCATION> severe arthritis. 
    2. AP maxillary deficiency.
    3. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
    4. AP mandibular deficiency.
    5. Transverse mandibular dental deficiency. 
    6. Class I malocclusion.
    7. Missing maxillary first bicuspids and mandibular left central incisor.
    8. Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors. 
    9. High occlusal plane angle. 
    10.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
    11.  Hypertrophied turbinates. 
    12.  Nasal airway obstruction. 
    13.  TMJ pain.
    14.  Headaches.
    15.  Myofascial pain. 
    16.  Earaches, tinnitus and vertigo.

    1. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.  Try to increase angulation of the maxillary incisors by tipping the roots palatally. 
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  
    2. CT scans of jaws and jaw joints. (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
    3. Surgery.
        a. <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
        b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. 
        <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
        d. Bilateral coronoidectomies.
        <LOCATION> inferior partial turbinectomies.  
    4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

