LAURA IACOFANO									09/04/2006

Laura is 46 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>.  She has had problems in the past with high-risk pregnancy with multiple complications.  Previous surgeries include tonsillectomy, appendectomy, tumor removed from leg, C-section and hysterectomy.  She is currently taking no medications.  She apparently has bouts with hayfever, glaucoma, arthritis and fibrocystic right kidney. 
	
    1. Headaches.
    2. Earaches.
    3. Popping in ears.
    4. Backaches.

    1. Motrin. 
    2. Tylenol.

    1. Dental model.
    2. Lateral cephalometric radiograph.
    3. Panorex.
    4. Photographs.
    5. History forms.

<PERSON> apparently is unaware of when her joint problems began but they have been severe since about 2000.  She apparently has clicking and popping in her jaw joints and significant pain with the pain greater on the right side as compared to the left side.  She gets severe headaches that are there constantly occurring in the temple areas, back of the head, top of the head and behind the eyes.  She also has neck, shoulder and back pain that is severe.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day and this is severe.  She gets earaches, ringing in her ears and lightheadedness and dizziness.  She is not aware of any other joint problems.  

She rates her TMJ pain at 8, headaches at 10, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 8, chewing at 4, disability at 6.  

    1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with apparent reductions. 
    2. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
    3. AP mandibular deficiency.
    4. Class II occlusion.
    5. Anterior deep bite. 
    6. Accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.
    7. Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. 
    8. TMJ pain.

<PERSON>				09/04/2006				Page 2


    9. Myofascial pain.
    10.  Headaches.
    11.  Mild crowding of lower anterior arch.
    12.  Over angulation of lower incisors.
    13.  Anterior deep bite of approximately 8 mm. 

    1. MRI of left and right TMJs.
    2. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.
        c. Consider placing turbos on the lingual maxillary incisors to open the bite vertically.  Then, the bicuspids and first molars could be vertically extruded somewhat to help level the accentuated curve of Spee.
    3. Surgery.
        a. <LOCATION> reconstruction by one of the following methods depending on MRI.
            i. Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning with Mitek anchors.
            ii. Consider bilateral total joint prostheses if discs and condyles are not salvageable.
        <PERSON> advancement approximately 10 mm by one of the following methods.
            i. Sagittal split osteotomies if discs are repositioned.
            ii. Total joint prostheses if condyles and discs are not salvageable.
        <LOCATION> osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect correcting any transverse problems that may be present.
    4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

