KIRSTEN JACOBSON							05/19/2011

Kirsten is 21 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, an oral surgeon in <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.  

Up until about the age of 13, <PERSON> was fairly healthy with no major medical problems.  At about the age of 13, she developed <PERSON> syndrome with atrophy of the soft and hard tissues on the right side of the face.  She first went up to Mayo Clinic for treatment by Dr. <PERSON>.  She then had a scar revision by Dr. <PERSON> in <LOCATION> who excised the scar that developed on the mid portion of her face including her forehead and on to her nose.  She subsequently had several fat transplants and this was done by Dr. <PERSON> at Mayo, but also by Dr. <PERSON> in <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>.  Dr. <PERSON> also more recently did retrobulbar implants to the right orbit to help protrude the right eye forward.  <PERSON> had orthodontics done on her upper arch around the age of 14 to 15 for abut 10 months.  She has been in a bite splint for the last 2 years.  


    1. Severe muscle spasms that affect predominantly the right masseter muscle and temporalis muscle.
    2. Clenching and bruxism.
    3. TMJ pain predominantly in the right jaw joint.
    4. Myofascial pain affecting predominantly the right temporalis and masseter muscles. 
    5. Facial asymmetry.
    6. Difficulties eating and chewing.

<PERSON> has received multiple Botox injections into the right masseter and right temporalis muscles to help control the severe muscle spasms.  

In frontal view, the right side of the face is smaller than the left side.  The inferior border on the right side is probably 8 to 10 mm higher than the left side.  There is soft tissue deficiency on the right side compared to the left side.  In the inferior border of the mandible in the chin and anterior mandibular area, there is vertical deficiency of probably about 8 to 10 mm.  The nasal tip is shifted off towards the right side probably 6 to 8 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is at least 4 mm off to the right of the facial midline.  The midline of her chin is probably 10 to 12 mm off towards the right side.  There is at least a 5 mm vertical cant in the occlusal plane with the cuspid being 5 mm higher than the left cuspid.  In profile from the left side, <PERSON> demonstrates good facial balance.  On the right side profile view, the chin has fairly good projection.  There are some deficiencies in the soft tissue projection on the right side due to the atrophy of the soft tissues and underlying  bone structures.  <PERSON> has end-on Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and a cross bite.  On the left side, she is just slight Class III cuspid relationship.  She has about a 3 mm anterior deep bite on the left central incisor area and a 1 mm deep bite by the right maxillary central incisor.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy except the soft palate on the right side is slightly atrophic compared to the left side as expected.  To palpation, she has very minimal tenderness over the right temporalis, masseter, TMJ and styloid area.  On opening, she has a click in the left joint at about 10 mm of opening and 5 mm of closing.  It is also more evident actually on excursion movements.  She hears a little crepitus in the right TMJ on function.  The maximal incisal opening is about 28 mm, excursion movement to the right 6 mm and to the left 2 mm.  

<PERSON> does have some problems sometimes when she is talking saying certain words where her teeth are close together and sometimes her jaws will just clamp down and interrupt her talking.  She does have some discoloration on her face and neck area on the right side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows an impacted maxillary left third molar, but the mandibular third molars are absent and the maxillary right second molar and third molar are absent.  She just recently had the second molar in the upper right side extracted because it had broken down and it was difficult to get in to even consider fixing as it was in a position where she was traumatizing her tongue by biting on it frequently.  

Coronal view shows that the septum appears reasonably straight back in the bony area.  The left turbinate is moderately enlarged than the right one to a lesser extent.  She has a little bit of thickening of the sinus membrane on the floor of the left maxillary sinus.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear in this view and the turbinates are moderately enlarged. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is flattened and appears to have an osteophyte sticking up off the superior aspect more towards the medial side of the condyle.  The articular eminence is fairly steep particularly towards the medial side and less steep at the lateral aspect.  The joint space appears somewhat decreased vertically.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone severe condylar resorption and degenerative changes.  There are some areas where there appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact with the anterior beaking of the condyle in juxtaproximation to the articular eminence.  It appears that at least two-thirds of the condylar height have been lost.  The articular eminence is fairly flat with some areas of degenerative changes within the fossa as well indicative of progressive reactive arthritis versus connective tissue autoimmune type of problem.  

Left TMJ coronal view shows that has fairly good mediolateral width.  There is decreased vertical joint space.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 2 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that shows evidence of severe condylar resorption and advanced arthritis.  There is a pseudocyst in the medial aspect of the remaining condylar head.  The bone is ebernated on top of the condyle as well as in the fossa.  The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 to 4 mm.  there appears to be decreased vertical joint space particularly towards the anterior aspect of the joint.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is significant difference in the vertical position of the inferior border of the mandible as well as the occlusion.  The vertical difference at the inferior border of the mandible at the first molar area is about 9 mm and back at the angle of the mandible it is probably closer to 14 to 15 mm.  The oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.  She does appear to have a Class I skeletal relationship.  The differences in the occlusal plane may be as high as 6 mm in the first molar area, however, the soft tissue projection actually looks fairly good in profile.  <PERSON> has a reverse tooth size discrepancy of about 1.5 mm.


    1. <PERSON> syndrome.
    2. Atrophy of soft tissues and bony structures on the right side of the face.
    3. Right maxillary vertical hypoplasia.
    4. Mandibular right vertical hypoplasia.
    5. Right TMJ resorptive arthritis secondary to the Parry-Romberg syndrome.
    6. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.
    7. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right cuspid being 5 mm higher than the left cuspid.
    8. Significant facial asymmetry with the nose being about 5 mm off to the right side, maxillary dental midline being 4 mm off to the right side, mandibular dental midline being 7 to 8 mm off to the right side, and chin 8 to 10 mm off to the right side.
    9. Severe soft tissues deficiency in the right face area.
    10. Impacted maxillary left third molar.
    11. Cross bite on the right side. 
    12. High occlusal plane angle on the right side.
    13. Coup de sabre in the midline.
    14. Chronic clenching and bruxism affecting predominantly the right masseter and temporal muscles.
    15. TMJ pain, right side greater than left. 
    16. Myofascial pain predominantly on the right side.
    17. Headaches predominantly on the right side. 
    18. Small diasthmes between the lower anterior teeth.


1.	<LOCATION> to try to control the nocturnal and daytime clenching and bruxism.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level mandibular arch.
	b.	Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and 			cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Right TMJ reconstruction and vertical lengthening of the mandible 				utilizing TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
	b.	Right TMJ fat graft.
	c.	Right coronoidotomy.
	d.	<LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek 			anchor.
	e.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the maxilla and 			expand.
	f.	Extract maxillary left third molar.
	g.	Consider bony augmentation laterally and vertically of the right 				mandibular ramus.
	h.	External rhinoplasty to shift the nose towards the left side.
	i.	Left mandibular ramus sagittal osteotomy.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
5.	Any additional procedures to augment and recontour the right side of the face that 	may be indicated.
