MARY <PERSON>									04/27/2009

<PERSON> is now 48 years old.  I first treated her back in 1995 with bilateral TMJ Christensen prostheses and maxillary osteotomy.  The Christensen devices failed and in about 1998 the failed Christensen devices were removed and bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses were placed with bilateral TMJ fat grafts.  <PERSON> continues to have significant problems with headaches that are the migraine nature.  She continues to have TMJ pain at about level of 8.  Her average daily pain is at a level of 9.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet at 5, and disability at 5.  She gets headaches in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area at about a level of 9.  Incisal opening is 31, although I believe is restricted because of pain issues.  To palpation, she has severe pain over the TMJs, styloid areas, high moderate pain over the masseter muscles, and mild pain over the medial pterygoids and shoulders.  She does wear a splint at night.  She wakes in the morning feeling the best, but then the during the days headaches begin.  She has no significant problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her neck, hips, lower back, and left shoulder.  The pain is the worst over the TMJ area.  She is missing all of her molars, but does have partial dentures.  She does have a good Class I cuspid relationship with a 1 mm vertical over bite.   

Radiographic evaluation with I-CAT reveals no evidence of heterotopic bone around the prostheses.  There does not appear to be any significant wear of the polyethylene.  


    1. Norvasc 5 mg 1 tablet q.d.
    2. Cymbalta 60 mg 2 tablets per day. 
    3. Wellbutrin XL 1 tablet q.d.
    4. Topamax 50 mg 1 tablet 2 times per day. 
    5. Ambien CR 12.5 mg q.h.s.
    6. Seroquel 200 mg 2 at bedtime.
    7. Imitrex injection p.r.n. 
    8. Midrin tablets as needed.
    9. Maxalt p.r.n. 
    10. Percocet p.r.n. 
    11. Antibiotics for chronic maxillary sinusitis. 


    1. Imitrex STAT dose kit 
    2. Midrin.
    3. Maxalt.  
    4. Lidocaine patches on neck, shoulders, and lower back. 


    1. Right maxillary severe chronic sinusitis.
    2. Possible hypersensitivity to materials in the prostheses created by the previous failed <PERSON> prostheses.


    1. Surgery to explore, debride, and hopefully eliminate the right maxillary sinusitis. 
    2. Tests for hypersensitivity to materials in the prostheses to determine presence or absence of metal hypersensitivity.  


    1. Desensitization to the materials. 
    2. Change out the prostheses to replace with mandibular components that do not contain the hypersensitive materials. 

