MICHELE KELK									   01-17-05

<PERSON> is 48 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 3929 <PERSON>, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>  63125.
 
Patient History

She has problems with severe migraine headaches. Previous surgeries include right and left knee surgery with two surgeries on the right knee, one on the left knee. She has had her tonsils and adenoids removed, and she has had her sinuses re-canaled. Except for her current problems, she is in fairly good health. She does have problems with arthritis in her knees. Previous history of stomach ulcers. She also has a previous history of anemia.


    1. Biofeedback
    2. Environmental health specialist treatment
    3. Wellness therapy
    4. Acupuncture
    5. Chiropractic adjustment
    6. Massage therapy (for 10 years)
    7. Chiropractic treatments for over 15 years, and she has been with the same therapist for the past 10 years
    8. Splint therapy for the past four months with a splint made by Dr. <PERSON>
    9. Aroma therapy

<PERSON>’s problems actually got worse on the splint therapy even after three adjustments.

She has had long-term earaches particularly on the right side, long-term tinnitus right side greater than left side, and long-term vertigo. She is not aware of any hearing loss problems. Other joints that bother her include her neck at around <LOCATION> where that particular vertebra apparently jumps out of position and has to be manipulated back into position by her chiropractor. She has had multiple operations on her knees, two on the right side, one on the left side. She does have allergies. Particularly odors can set off her migraine headaches, but she is not aware of any problems wearing jewelry. Pain is usually worse about 1 o’clock in the afternoon. She is aware that she does clench at nighttime and during the day.

<PERSON> keeps almost constant ice packs on her face and jaws as this is helpful for her controlling her pain.

Current Medications

    1. Relpax 40 mg p.r.n. 
    2. Prometrium 100 mg 2 per day
    3. Nystatin 500,000 mg 2 tablets 4 times a day, and she has been on and off this for the past year, thinking this is causing her migraine headaches
    4. Armour Thyroid probably 1.5 mg per day
    5. Vivelle Dot (hormone)
    6. Alpha Lipoic
    7. <PERSON>. Vitamin C powder 1000 mg, and she takes ¼ tsp. in the morning and evening
    9. MSM powder
    10. Magnesium
    11. Potassium

Patient Concerns

    1. Severe migraines
    2. Pain through the neck, shoulders, and back
    3. Language inadequacy secondary to severe migraines
    4. Deficiency in mental acuity with the migraines

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, she has fairly good AP balance between the jaw structures, cheeks, and nose. 

Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids. In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids. She has basically a Class II end-on cuspid relationship of about 4 to 5 mm. She has a tendency toward a division II malocclusion. <PERSON> appears clear with soft palate, uvula, and transverse width of the faucial pillars all within normal range.

Intranasally, however, the turbinates are moderately enlarged, and she has septal spurs extending off of both sides of the septum and almost touch against the turbinates.

To palpation, <PERSON> has some high moderate to low severe pain over the styloid areas, moderate pain over the posterior neck and shoulder areas, milder pain over the left <LOCATION>, bilateral temporalis and masseter areas. 

On opening, the right joint functions reasonably smoothly. However, the left side has an opening click at about 20 to 25 mm and a closing click at 5 mm. <PERSON> is aware that her right side does pop particularly when she goes in side-to-side movement, so the right side does click in left excursive movements. Maximal incisal opening is 42 mm and about 35 mm with reasonable comfort. Excursive movements are 12 mm in each direction, but both joints do pop with the left side being more prominent than the right side. <PERSON> is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the day particularly when she gets her migraine headaches.
Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses appear relatively clear but difficult to tell in this image. Difficult to determine the position of the turbinates. She has a crown on the mandibular left first molar. Left condyle appears flattened along the anterior aspect of the condyle as does the right side with the right side actually appearing to have a little bit more flattening than the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows there appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep, and there is an increased joint space anteriorly. Styloid process appears to come down and overlap the posterior border of the mandible. 

Right TMJ likewise shows a condyle that appears posteriorly positioned in the fossa with fairly minimal room along the posterior wall. Slightly decreased superior space as well. Articular eminence is moderately steep, and there is a slightly increased anterior joint space. <PERSON> could be a little sclerotic on this side. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles down onto the articular eminence with the left side having slightly greater amount of translation as compared to the right side. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. <LOCATION> are of moderate size. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a slight skeletal Class II jaw relationship. Head is postured up and forward a little bit, and oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.

Basic Diagnoses

    1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction
    2. Mandibular hypoplasia
    3. Class II occlusion, division II
    4. Anterior deep bite
    5. TMJ pain
    6. Severe myofascial pain
    7. Severe headaches (migraines)
    8. Earaches
    9. Tinnitus
    10. Vertigo
    11. Missing four first bicuspids and all four third molars
    12. Hypertrophied turbinates 
    13. Bilateral nasal septal spurs
    14. Nasal airway obstruction

Recommended Treatment

    1. Presurgical orthodontics 
        A. Align and level maxillary arch 
        B. Align and level mandibular arch. Consider stripping lower anterior teeth to keep from flaring them any further forward

    2. Surgery
        A. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
        <LOCATION> mandibular ramus osteotomies to establish proper jaw and occlusal relationship
        C. Partial inferior turbinectomies
        D. Removal of bilateral nasal septal spurs

    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

