NIKI KERAMAT									02/26/2008

<PERSON> is 13 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 3105 Legacy Drive, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION> 75023.  <PERSON> has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability all at zero.  She takes no medications.  No earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo and no other joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxing.  


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars.  Retained primary E on the right side with lack of a successor beneath that tooth.  On the left side, the crown is still remaining of the primary E, although the second right cuspid is developing beneath the resorbing crown and root of the primary E.  She has a 6 x 6 retainer in place.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Difficult to evaluate the joints.  Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear.  Septum is reasonably straight.  Nasal airway appears partially blocked on the left side compared to the right side.  Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears slightly small in size.  There appears to be decreased joint space vertically.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit more of a hockey stick shape to it.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There may be some slight decreased vertical joint space.  On opening, there is moderately good translation of both joints.  Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a totally high occlusal plane angle, significant adenoid mass in the nasopharynx area, and some constricture of the oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level where it measures about 9 mm, but up by the adenoid tissue measures only about 5 mm.  She has a high occlusal plane angle and vertical discrepancy at least at the occlusal level.  <PERSON> and mandible appear AP deficient.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of about 1.5 to 2 mm.  


1.	<LOCATION> articular disc dislocations.
2.	AP maxillary hypoplasia and vertical asymmetry.
3.	Vertical maxillary hypoplasia. 
4.  	AP mandibular hypoplasia.
5.	Class III cuspid molar relationship.
6.	Anterior overbite.  
7.	Crossbite on the right side.  
	8.	High occlusal plane angle.  
9.	Crowding of lower anterior arch. 
10.	Snoring.
11.	Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
12.	Residual adenoid tissue in nasopharynx. 
13.  	Retained mandibular primary left E with a successor.
14.	Retained mandibular primary right E without a permanent successor.


	1.  	Presurgical orthodontics.
a.  Align and level maxillary arch.  
b.  Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring them any further forward.
	2.  	MRI of left and right TMJ in about 1 year. 
3.	Monitor growth and development.  
4.	Surgery.
a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back onto the facial midline, level the transverse occlusal plane as well as the AP occlusal plane and advance the mandible.  
c.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it posteriorly as well as level it transversely.  
d.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars <LOCATION>
5.  	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
6.	Possible eventual replacement of mandibular primary right E.
