CYNTHIA KING									10-06-04

<PERSON> is 40 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON> here in <LOCATION>. 

Patient History

She has had three C-sections, and she has had a deviated septum worked on twice and has had a genioplasty. She does have mitral valve prolapse, but it is not significant at all to where she even has to take antibiotics for dental work or other type of factors. <PERSON> takes very good care of herself. <PERSON>’s problems began about the age of 13. She was treated by Dr. <PERSON> in <LOCATION>. He treated her with appliances and orthodontics from the age of 13 to 15 years old. Then in 1982, she had repeat of partial orthodontics. She had orthodontics done again in 1996 by Dr. <PERSON>. This lasted for a year. She then later on was treated again with the upper arch using <PERSON>. She currently takes no medications. She gets left earaches occasionally but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She feels that her tongue does protrude some when she speaks. She is not aware of any clenching or bruxism, although she used to do that. She has no headache problems. She has no TMJ pain problems when she consciously holds her lower jaw forward and can keep it there most of the time. She can get pain or discomfort when it gets cold or if she allows her lower jaw to shift backward. On an average day, her pain levels are a level of 2, jaw function and diet at a level of 5, and disability at 1.

<PERSON> has had occurrences where she takes up unable to catch her breath, and then she wakes up very abruptly and has to breathe deeply to catch her breath. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and <PERSON> are all pretty much aligned with each other. 

In profile view, <PERSON> has just probably some slight AP maxillary deficiency of maybe just about 2 to 3 mm. <PERSON> is AP deficient by 15 to 18 mm. Does have some lip incompetence of probably about 6 mm. 

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. <PERSON> believes that she has had all four second molars extracted, so that the last teeth present intraorally may actually be her third molars. This was done when she was still back in <LOCATION>.  Lower anterior teeth appear small. Appears that they may have been recontoured a few times particularly the cuspids appear quite narrow. Teeth are fairly well-aligned, and she has a 3 x 3 retainer. Appears to have adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch. Slight Division II occlusal tendency. Upper teeth appear quite vertical in orientation. In centric occlusion, she has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilateral by probably at least 3 mm. She has probably about a 0.5-mm overbite relationship. Transversely, the occlusal plane looks fairly level. 

Intranasally, the septum is fairly straight with a little bit of deviation to the left and then back toward the right. Left turbinate is a little bit larger than the right side though there appears that there may be adequate airway. 

To palpation, she has mild tenderness over the masseter muscles, left TMJ, and high moderate pain to palpation over the right TMJ. On opening, left joint is relatively smooth, but on the right side she has a click at about 25 mm of opening and a closing click also. Seems a little bit different than the usual di dislocation kind of click. Maximal incisal opening is 30 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 4 mm and to the left 5 mm. In centric relation, <PERSON> is uncomfortable. She holds her lower jaw forward until she has an anterior crossbite of 1 to 2 mm. In this position she is much more comfortable. There is a tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of about 1.5 mm. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the left sinus looks a little bit fuzzy compared to the right sinus. Left nasal airway also looks a little bit fuzzy compared to the right side although clinically cannot really see anything of significance. She is missing all four second molars and has the third molars in the second molar position. She has crowns on the maxillary right first molar, left first molar, mandibular right third molar, and left third molar. She has a lot of restorations on the maxillary right third molar, mandibular right first molar, second bicuspid, and left first molar. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. <PERSON> look short vertically and appear to be flattened and fairly arthritic. She may have some significant root resorption on the mandibular right lateral incisor and cuspid. However, difficult to tell on this x-ray. She does have a bone plate in her chin. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is diminutive in size. It appears to have lost significant volume. Significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Has a high occlusal plane angle and high mandibular plane angle. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat arthritic. May be some anterior beaking present. Joint space appears decreased particularly the superior anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. 

On opening, she has restricted translation in both joints. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. A little deviation of the nasal septum. The left turbinate appears somewhat enlarged compared to the right side. Facial symmetry appears reasonably good. Chin plate seen in the midline of the chin. On this radiograph, it appears that she does have the roots of her lower right lateral incisor and cuspid. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla and mandible. She has a high occlusal plane angle. Upper incisors are in significant vertical inclination. Lower incisors are slightly overangulated. She has a bone plate in the chin area. Oropharyngeal airway is significantly restricted with only about a 2-mm airway at the base of the tongue and about 2.5 mm at the tip of the soft palate. She does have increased vertical space between the dorsum of the tongue and the hard palate. She does have a skeletal Class II.

Basic Diagnoses

    1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations and nonsalvageable discs
    2. AP mandibular deficiency
    3. AP maxillary deficiency
    4. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
    5. Class II end-on occlusion 
    6. High occlusal plane angulation
    7. Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors
    8. Tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 1.5 mm
    9. TMJ pain
    10. Myofascial pain
    11. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with a dimension of 2 mm (normal 11 mm)
    12. Sleep apnea symptoms 
    13. Ptosis of lower lip
    14. Mild paresthesia, lower lip

Recommended Treatment

    1. CT Scan of left and right TMJ

    2. Presurgical orthodontics 
        A. Align and level maxillary arch. Open up space around the upper lateral incisors to equal a millimeter around each lateral incisor
        B. Align and level mandibular arch but keep spaces closed

    3. Surgery
        A. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
        <LOCATION> mandibular coronoidectomies
        <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvested from abdomen or buttock)
        D. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and downgraft it posteriorly
        E. Consider taking out bone plate in chin and recontouring bone with resuspension of mentalis muscles

4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
