KATHERINE KONKER								12/11/2008


<PERSON> has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor myofascial pain.  She has no earaches, no vertigo, but does get occasional tinnitus.  Her ankles are weak, but otherwise no joint problems.  She takes some hormone medication Yaz 1 tablet at night and takes no other medicine.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  There may be a little tendency for the jaws to shift off towards the right side.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm.  The maxillary midline is shifted off to the right side about almost 1.5 to 2 mm.  The mandible is shifted off to the right side about 3 mm.  The chin is off to the right side about 6 mm.  Upper mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile view, the maxilla may be retruded 2 to 3 mm.  The chin is retruded about 20 mm.  The chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well defined.  Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  The teeth appear nicely aligned and level.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars.  She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  There is a transverse cant in the occlusion with the right side being about 2 mm higher than the left side.  The maxillary right cuspid is about 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  The mandibular right cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid.  When <PERSON> postures her mandible off towards the left side about 2 mm, it improves her facial symmetry.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal.  Intranasally, the left turbinate appears enlarged.  The right side appears relatively normal, but that is just at the anterior aspect.  I could not evaluate the posterior aspect.  Septum appears reasonably normal.  There may be some moderate nasal airway blockage.  <PERSON> is not aware of any significant snoring problems usually.  She may have some mild to moderate daytime somnolence.  No sleep apnea symptoms to her knowledge.  She does not believe that she is a mouth breather when she sleeps. She may have just a slight head postured forward neck position.  To palpation, <PERSON> has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  On opening, the right joint seems to function reasonably smoothly, but in the left side, she has palpable click at about 15 to 20 mm of opening and a closing one at likely about 10 mm.  She has about a 2 mm anterior overbite.  

    1. Bilateral TMJ AICR.
    2. Posterior vertical and maxillary hypoplasia. 
    3. AP maxillary hypoplasia.
    4. AP mandibular hypoplasia.
    5. AP microgenia. 
    6. Class I occlusion.
    7. High occlusal plane angle of 21 degrees (normal 8 degrees).
    8. Decreased oropharyngeal airway. 
    9. Asymmetry in the maxillary and mandibular arches with the right cuspids being 2 mm posterior to the left cuspids. 


    1. Presurgical orthodontics.  
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  
    2. Surgery.
        a. <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor. 
        b. Multiple mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction. 
        c. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft it posteriorly and advance it. 
        <LOCATION> genioplasty. 
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I talked to <PERSON> and her parents in reference to the diagnoses and intended surgery as well as to the risks and complications.  They understand.  <PERSON>’s brother <PERSON> previously underwent TMJ and orthognathic surgery with me probably about 4 or 5 years ago.  He has done very well.  With that experience, they have a good understanding of the process.  We will get some records today and get her workup completed for surgery next Tuesday.  

