CASEY KRANNING			Telephone Conversation 			10-04-03

<PERSON> has oculoauricular vertebral syndrome. She has had 25 previous surgeries. She has had rib grafting done to reconstruct her mandible, and she has had distraction osteogenesis x 2. She said the last time it was very painful for her, and they told her part of the reason was that she didn’t have any skin left to stretch. The primary concern she has is facial asymmetry, and she focuses predominantly on the chin area.


    1. Oculoauricular vertebral syndrome
    2. Facial asymmetry with the right side shorter vertically and with the chin off to the right side probably 8 to 10 mm
    3. Right-sided crossbite
    4. Dental midlines off to the right with the mandible being more greatly deviated than the maxilla
    5. Missing maxillary right third molar, right central incisor, left lateral incisor, mandibular right central incisor, lateral incisor, and all three molars, as well as the left first and second bicuspids and second and third molars
    6. She has an impacted maxillary third molar and mandibular left third molar
    7. She probably has a significantly deviated nasal septum.
    8. She probably has hypertrophied turbinates particularly on the left side that may cause some nasal airway obstruction, but I forgot to ask her that specific question
    9. Possible absence of ramus on the right side
    10. Fibrous ankylosis of the left TMJ
    11. Significantly decreased jaw function

I told her I could not determine if she has any joint function or any bone in the right ramus area based on the x-rays provided since they were of poor quality. 


    1. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints and a model constructed

    2. Presurgical orthodontics 
        A. Align and level maxillary arch 
        B. Align and level mandibular arch 

    3. Surgery
        A. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to rotate the maxilla back toward the left side, level it transversely, and advance it
        B. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses
        C. Possible cranial bone grafts to reconstruct the rami particularly on the right side
        D. Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs
        E. Possible genioplasty to improve facial symmetry

    4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

    5. Placement of dental implants

    6. Dental reconstruction

I feel this will probably give us the best opportunity of correcting her problems and getting her some reasonable jaw function. However, with the distraction osteogenesis being performed twice, it is difficult to know how much soft tissue fibrosis and how much muscle fibrosis has occurred from this treatment. Aalthough I feel that we can improve her situation, the surgery could be very difficult to perform because of her previous treatments.
