KALINA KWONG									11/07/2005
DOB:  08/05/1992. 

Kalina is 13 years old.  She is referred by Dr. <PERSON>.  She is in good health with no major medical problems.  

PRIMARY CONCERN
    1. Headaches.
    2. Pain in the jaw joints. 
    3. Difficulty breathing through the nose.


In frontal view, Kalina has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 5 mm.  Maxillary midline is about 1 mm or 2 off to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly close to being on the facial midline or maybe just about 1 mm off to the right side.  <PERSON> appears to be off to the right side probably about 2 to 3 mm.  Maxillary midline maybe 1 mm off to the left and mandibular dental midline 1 mm off to the right.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are pretty much aligned with each other.  In profile view, she has fairly good balance in the upper lips, cheeks and nose.  The chin appears retruded by probably about 12 to 15 mm.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has adequate attached gingiva of lower anterior arch.  She has anterior deep bite of about 5 mm.  She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally.  Class II is a little bit greater on the right side and she is closer to a Class I on the left side with only about 2 mm of Class II on the left and probably 4 mm Class II on the right.  Upper incisor crown length is probably about 8.5 mm.  When <PERSON> smiles she exposes about 6 mm of gingiva.  Intraorally, the soft tissues look healthy.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.  Tonsils appear fairly minimal in size.  Intranasally, the septum looks fairly straight.  The right turbinate appears relatively normal in size.  The left turbinate appears enlarged and appears to block a fair portion of the airway.  
KALINA KWONG				11/8/2005				Page 2

To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the TMJs and styloid areas.  Joints seem to function reasonably smooth.  The maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm.  Excursive movement is about 9 mm in each direction.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars as being impacted.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  Some dilacerations on the lower bicuspids.  Left maxillary central incisor has an opacified root.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  There may be some slight decreased posterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There may be some decreased posterior joint space.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles forward and anterior to the articular eminence.  

Waters view shows the sinuses look relatively clear.  Nasal septum is deviated just slightly off the left side.  The turbinate on the right side actually looks a little larger than on the left side, which is opposite the clinical impression.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some adenoid tissue still remaining in the oropharynx.  The turbinate extends back towards the posterior aspect of the hard palate.  However, oropharyngeal airway appears acceptable with the dimension of about 6 to 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 to 9 at the base of the tongue.  She appears to have a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.  Moderately high occlusal plane angle.  Lower incisors appear a little bit overangulated.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
    1. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated anteriorly. 
    2. Right TMJ arthritis and possible medial displacement of the articular disc. 
    3. Vertical maxillary excess.
    4. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency. 
    5. AP mandibular deficiency. 
    6. Class II end-on occlusion. 
    7. High occlusal plane angle.
    8. Anterior deep bite.
    9. Impacted third molars x4.
    10. Hypertrophied turbinates.
    11. Partial nasal airway obstruction.
    12. Overangulation of lower anteriors. 
    13. Crowding of lower anteriors.
    14. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 2.5.
    15. Headaches.
    16. TMJ pain.
<PERSON>				11/8/2005				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
    1. MRI of left and right TMJs to include coronal views.
    2. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure and close spacing.
    3. Surgery.
        a. <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors (dependent on MRI confirmation.)
        b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies moving the anterior maxilla superiorly and posterior aspect inferiorly.  
        <LOCATION> mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
        d. Anterior augmentation genioplasty with sliding genioplasty.  
        e. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4.
    4. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
    5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

               
