MATTHEW LAVAN 								10/4/05

Matthew is 16 years old, referred by <PERSON>, DDS, 10 <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>, 07834.  Phone:  973-625-4917.  <PERSON> is in good health with no major medical problems.  He takes no medications.  He has no problems with earaches, vertigo or hearing loss.  He gets rarely tinnitus. He has some problems with his right shoulder.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  No headaches, TMJ pain or pain or pain around the head and neck area.  He does have some problem with the back of his neck that he tends to push on his jaw to sort of pop it.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
    1. Jaws do not fit together.
    2. Difficulty eating and chewing.
    3. Jaw problem getting worse.
    4. Bites only on the very back teeth. 

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left to right facial symmetry though the mandible may be deviated off a little off towards the left side.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 1 mm at the tubercle and probably about 2.5 at the lateral aspects.  Nasal tip is fairly straight.  Maxillary midline may be about 1 mm off to the right side.  Mandibular dental midline may be off to the left side a couple of mm.  The chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline.  He does have more fullness on the right side of his face with the right ramus being probably 5 to 6 mm more full than the left side.  In the profile view, there is some slight deficiency in the upper orbital area but actually not too back, perhaps 3 to 4 mm.  There is some AP deficient of the maxilla of probably 5 mm.  There is AP deficiency by probably about 6 mm or so.  The lower lip is everted and protrusive and the upper lip probably 3 to 4 mm.  Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back through the third molars.  He has appliances on his teeth.  The lower arch appears fairly well aligned and level.  The lower arch is fairly symmetric anteriorly and posteriorly.  In the upper arch, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back through the third molars present.  He has an anterior open bite of probably 5 mm.  He has a reverse overjet of probably 8 mm or so.  AP asymmetry in the maxillary arch with the left cuspid being probably 3 mm posterior to right cuspid. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level.  He does have a crossbite on the left side posteriorly.  There is a yaw in the bite with the mandible being shifted probably 2 to 3 mm off to the right side, maxilla about 2 mm off to the right side.  He has a super Class III occlusal relationship bilaterally.  Arches fit together asymmetrically.  Occludes only on the mandibular first and second molars and maxillary second and third molars.  <PERSON> has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.  <PERSON> had orthodontics on in the 2nd grade and 7th grade.  He had maxillary expansion devices.  <PERSON> had the braces placed on again in June of 2005.  <PERSON> appears clear.  The uvula is extremely large and it is reported that <PERSON> does snore.  Soft palate and faucial pillars are relatively normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  It still appears that there is likely an adequate airway.  He has a twin with a Class III jaw relationship as well as an uncle and a cousin. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION  
Panorex shows the presence of 4 erupted third molars.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  <LOCATION> appear moderate in size.  Difficult to evaluate the TMJs.

<PERSON>				10/4/05				Page 2


Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  He has huge frontal sinuses that go all the way across the roof of the orbits.  The nasoseptum appears relatively straight.  <LOCATION> appear moderate in size.  

Right TMJ tomogram is not real clear.  There appears to be better joint space in <PERSON>.  Posterior joint space may be somewhat decreased but difficult to tell.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is well centered in the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  Joint space looks fairly well balanced.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles completely out of the fossa. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows the presence of AP maxillary deficiency and mandibular prognathism.  High occlusal plane angle is present.  Oropharyngeal airway appears clear.  Adenoid tissue has resorbed to a fair extent although there is still a little bit left.  Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.  

Dental model analysis shows that there is no significant tooth size discrepancy.  There is accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch.  <PERSON> reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch.  Shifting the mandible to a Class I cuspid relationship shows that there is still an anterior open bite tendency and there is a crossbite posteriorly in the molar area on the right side and tendency towards the left side.  There is an increase curve of Wilson in the lower arch and increase curve of Wilson in the maxillary arch as well.

    1. Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.
    2. Mandibular deviated prognathism.
    3. Maxillary AP hypoplasia.
    4. Bilateral infraorbital/malar hypoplasia. 
    5. Apertognathia.
    6. Super Class III occlusion.
    7. Occluding only on the maxillary first and second molars and mandibular second and third molars.
    8. Malaligned third molars x4.
    9. Hyperplastic uvula.
    10. Snoring.
    11. Lip incompetence.
    12. Accentuated curve of occlusion in the upper arch. 
    13. Slightly reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. 
    14. High occlusal plane angle.
    15. Masticatory dysfunction.
<PERSON>				10/4/05				Page 3


    1. Presurgical orthodontics. 
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Place the vertical step in the arch wire so that the 4 incisors are elevated at a level approximately 2 to 3 mm higher than the cuspids and posterior teeth.  Try to level the posterior 5 teeth on each side. 
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to elevate the lower incisors slightly and depress the bicuspids as there is a slightly reverse of occlusion in the lower arch.  
    2. Surgery.
        <LOCATION> mandibular high condylectomies. 
        b. <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
        <LOCATION> mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible posteriorly and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
        d. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward slightly and down graft it posteriorly.  
        e. Extract malaligned maxillary mandibular third molars.
        f. Uvulectomy.
        g. Bilateral infraorbital/malar augmentations.
        h. Grafting intraorbital and malar area.
    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 



