LISA LEE										03/05/2007

Lisa is 26 years old and is referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

    1. Teeth don’t fit together very well
    2. Difficulties breathing through the nose.
    3. Cannot close the lips together without straining the muscles in her chin.
    4. Difficulties in chewing.

She has had previous orthodontics from age 11 to 13 and had 4 first bicuspids extracted.  She has also had her third molars removed.  The only medication she is currently taking is prenatal vitamins.  She has no problems with earaches but gets occasional tinnitus and gets vertigo about 2 times a week but no hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  She is aware of clenching at nighttime and sometimes during the day.  She gets headaches once or twice a month at about a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal areas bilaterally.  No TMJ pain and no pain around the head and neck area on an average day.  She rates her jaw function at 5, diet and disability at 0.  Maximal incisal opening is 44 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, left 6 mm.  Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.  To palpation, she has some mild tenderness around the masseter areas and the styloid areas.  

Upper lip length is 20 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 5.5 mm.  Slight facial asymmetry with the right side being a little bit more full by probably 2 to 3 mm.  She has lip incompetence of 8 to 10 mm.  In profile view, she has some slight AP deficiency in the subnasale and <PERSON> appears to be retruded by about 12 to 15 mm.  She has a Class II end-on occlusion on the left side by about 3 to 4 mm and on the right side by about 4 to 5 mm.  She has an anterior open bite of 1 mm.  She has spaces open in the upper arch in the second bicuspid area.  In the first bicuspid the spaces are still closed.  Intraorally, the tissues look healthy and the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars appear relatively normal as do the tonsils.  She has significant gag reflex.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  The septum deviates significantly off to the left side causing almost total obliteration of the airway on the left side.  She has probably some mild lip suction on the right side.  She is not aware of snoring.  She has some daytime tiredness.  She is not aware of any sleep apnea problems.  She said she did have a sleep study performed that showed that she had frequent arousals at night but apparently there was not enough sleep pathology to provide the diagnosis of sleep apnea.  She is predominately a mouth breather.  She cannot do athletic activities secondary to difficulty breathing through her nose.

Panorex shows the absence of lower first bicuspids and upper first bicuspid.  The second bicuspid spaces had been opened in that arch.  Four third molars are missing.  The condyles look relatively normal.  Sinuses look relatively clear. 

Waters view shows that the bony septum is straight although the cartilage septum clinically is significantly deviated.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  <LOCATION> appear enlarged particularly on the left side.  The sinus areas look relatively clear.
<PERSON> 					03/05/2007				Page 2


Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is relatively normal.  Joint space looks well balanced.

Right TMJ shows a condyle that appears a little bit altered.  Articular eminence is relatively normal.  Joint space appears fairly well balanced.  On opening there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the mandible is retruded.  The maxilla is long vertically, anteriorly and perhaps decreased in vertical inclination at the posterior aspect of the maxilla.  She has an overjet relationship of about 6 mm.  Oropharyngeal airway is about 4 mm at the base of the tongue and the soft palate level measures closer to about 5 mm at the uvula area.  The occlusal plane appears moderately high.  Vertical height of the mandible appears elongated.  She has hyperfunction of mentalis muscle.  

    1. Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
    2. Possible transverse maxillary deficiency.
    3. AP mandibular deficiency.
    4. AP microgenia.
    5. Anterior mandibular vertical excess.
    6. Class II end-on occlusion. 
    7. Spaces for maxillary second bicuspids.
    8. Absence of all 4 first bicuspids and third molars.
    9. Deviated nasal septum.
    10.  Nasal airway obstruction.  
    11.  Hypertrophied turbinates.
    12.  Difficulties breathing through the nose.

    1. Presurgical orthodontics. 
        <PERSON> to align and level maxillary arch.
        b. Continue to align and level mandibular arch.
    2. Surgery.
        <LOCATION> mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.
        b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, rotate the posterior aspect posteriorly and correct any transverse problems that may be present. 
        <PERSON> septoplasty.  
        d. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies. 
        e. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy with bone plate stabilization.
    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
    4. Osseointegrated implants to the maxillary second bicuspid areas.
    5. Restorative dentistry to place crowns on the bilateral second bicuspid implants.  
