<PERSON>									04/30/2010

Sheila is 55 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 4610 <PERSON>, Suite A-6, <LOCATION>, TX 79705, phone # 432-620-0800.  She is currently under orthodontic treatment with Dr. <PERSON> and Dr. <PERSON>. 



    1. Premarin 0.3 mg q.d.
    2. Synthroid 125 mcg q.d.
    3. Bystolic 5 mg q.d.
    4. Vytorin 10/20 q.d.
    5. <PERSON> 70 mg weekly.
    6. B12 injections monthly.
    7. Vitamin D 5000 units monthly.
    8. Ambien 5 to 10 mg p.r.n. 


    1. Teeth do not fit together.
    2. Limited jaw function. 
    3. <PERSON> is affected.
    4. Open bite where the back teeth do not touch.
    5. Difficulties eating and chewing.

<PERSON> also has some mild snoring, moderate daytime tiredness.  She does not believe she has sleep apnea, but she has had insomnia since 1995.  She has significant difficulties sleeping.  She does not have any significant difficulties breathing through her nose.  She did have a sleep study done November 22, 2005.  She had no apneic or hypopnea events.  She only had about 0.3 minutes under 90% oxygenation.  Her arousal index, however, was 9.7 related to spontaneous arousals.  She had some snoring and 5 arousals from snoring.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has reasonably good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face, but some asymmetry in the mandible.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is fairly much on the facial midline.  The tip of the nose is off to the right side about 3 mm.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted to the left about 4 mm.  The chin is 3 mm off towards the left.  In profile, the maxilla is retruded 6 to 8 mm and the chin is retruded probably 10 to 12 mm and chin neckline is extremely short.  Nose appears relatively prominent.  <PERSON> neckline is short and chin neck angle is not defined.  She has to have an obtuse nasolabial angle.  Upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale.  Intraorally, she is missing the lower first bicuspids.  She has significant crowding in the lower anterior arch with the left central incisor blocked almost completely out of the arch in a lingual direction.  She probably has about 6 mm of crowding in the lower anterior arch.  In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspid as well.  She is in full braces currently with braces back to the first molars.  She has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship on the right side being about 3 to 4 mm Class III and on the left side she is closer to a Class I relationship.  She does have close to a 2 mm anterior overbite relationship.  She has a posterior cross bite on the left side.  The maximal incisal opening is 24 mm, excursion movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 0.  <PERSON> does have about a 2 mm open bite bilaterally in the posterior occlusion.  Joints seem to function reasonably smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows that the absence of all 4 third molars and absence of the first bicuspids.  She has hyper-calcification around the molar teeth in all 4 quadrants.  Sinuses appear relatively clear.  She has a number of crowns and it looks like a root canal on the maxillary right lateral incisor.  

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are relatively normal in size.  The septum deviates a little bit off towards the left side. 

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear and turbinates are relatively normal in size.  The septum is deviated just slightly off to the left side.  

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram shows that she has severe arthritis in this joint.  There is some anterior beaking.  There is significantly vertical and posterior joint space.  The articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There appears to be an osteophyte extending up off the head of the condyle towards the lateral aspect of the joint.  

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have greater arthritic changes and there also are arthritic changes in the fossa.  It appears that there is some reactive bone in and around the joint area.  There is decreased joint space towards the medial aspect of the joint. 

Left TMJ coronal view shows arthritic changes.  There is significantly decreased vertical and lateral joint space.  It appears there is almost bone-on-bone contact.  The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 4 mm.  

Right TMJ coronal view shows advanced arthritic changes with a pseudocyst in the condylar head and erosions.  There are also erosions in the fossa.  There appears to be some heterotopic within the joint space.  The joint spaces are quite narrow and in some areas appear to be bone-on-bone contact.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a retruded maxilla and mandible.  She has a moderate high occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and about 6.5 mm at the base of the tongue.  She appears to have a skeletal Class I and occlusal Class I type of relationship.  <PERSON> has a tooth size discrepancy with a negative 1 mm.  


    1. Right TMJ severe arthritis and ankylosis.
    2. Left TMJ arthritis. 
    3. AP maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.
    4. AP mandibular hypoplasia.
    5. Class III occlusion on the right side.
    6. Cross bite on the left side. 
    7. Missing all 4 first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic reasons and all 4 third molars. 
    8. Significantly decreased incisal opening of 24 mm (normal 45 to 50 mm).
    9. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal 11 mm).
    10. Difficulties eating and chewing.
    11. Bilateral posterior open bites. 


1.	Presurgical orthodontics. 
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.  
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Keep all of the teeth and align the lower 				anteriors.  This will tip them forward slightly to an end-on incisor relationship.  
2.	CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
3.	Surgery.
	a.	<LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with eliminate the 			asymmetry.
	b.	Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.
	c.	<LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
	d.	<LOCATION> coronoidotomies.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
