BREANNA LITTLE									02-18-04

Bre is 18 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, OK.

Patient History

<PERSON>’s TMJ problems may have begun about three years ago. She remembers about three years ago she got hit in the face with a medicine ball that sort of knocked her out for a little while. About two years ago, someone was carrying her and dropped her, and she struck her chin on a countertop and got bruised. She also had her wisdom teeth removed in 11/2001. <PERSON> was born with congenitally missing the maxillary lateral incisors. From ’98 to 2000, she went through orthodontics to open up spacing for those lateral incisors and had a bridge to replace the missing laterals. In 2002 through 2003, she was re-treated by Dr. <PERSON>, who had the upper bridges removed and opened up spaces. <PERSON> subsequently has had dental implants placed in the maxillary lateral incisor areas and has had crowns placed on those. She has had some chiropractic treatment. She has had some problems with some other joints in the past but has no problems now with any other joints except for her jaw joints. 

<PERSON> gets headaches about two to three times a week that she rates at about a level of 7 that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal area. She rates her daily TMJ pain at about a 7, but again it can escalate to 10. Her average daily pain is about a 6. She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 7, and disability at 4. 

She gets occasional earaches, occasional tinnitus, and occasional vertigo but no hearing loss. No other joints bother her at this time. <PERSON> has worn a bite splint to try to deprogram her muscles, but this was ineffective for her. She wore it for about a week, but it made her pain more intense. 

In searching further into previous traumatic injuries to the jaws, <PERSON> stated that the first injury with the medicine ball occurred when some people were playing with a medicine ball, and she happened to be walking by and got struck on the left side of the face. She apparently blacked out or was unconscious or a few minutes after that incident. She had some significant pain and discomfort around the head and jaw area for a few days. It then eventually subsided. The second incident occurred about two years ago where some boys picked her up and dropped her where her chin struck a countertop, and she got quite bruised around the jaws after that. It was after this incident that her pain began to worsen significantly. She was first diagnosed with the TMJ problems by Dr. <PERSON> approximately two years ago. This was after both of those traumatic injuries to the jaws. 

Patient Concerns

    1. Jaw joint pain
    2. Headaches 
    3. Difficulties eating and chewing
    4. Difficulties singing
    5. Frequently wakes up with her jaws locked

Current Medications

    1. Vioxx but not daily
    2. Ibuprofen 400 mg tablets when needed for pain
    3. Tylenol for pain if she doesn’t need to take the ibuprofen
    4. Zoloft 50 mg q.d. 

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good facial symmetry and balance. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 6 to 7 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and <PERSON> are all pretty much on the facial midline. 

In profile view, she does exhibit some lip incompetence of probably about 6 to 7 mm. Chin-neckline looks fairly good. Chin AP position may be just slightly retruded but not too bad. Has fairly good AP facial balance. May be just slightly long vertically in the profile view. 

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer. She has adequate attached gingiva, although it is quite thin around the cuspids through the central incisors bilaterally. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. Has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She is missing the maxillary lateral incisors but has implants and crowns to replace those teeth. Upper incisor crown length is about 11 mm. <PERSON> is clear. Tonsils are of moderate size. 

Intranasally, the turbinates are of moderate size, and it appears that she has an adequate nasal airway. 

On opening, she has about a 51-mm distance. She can only open about 15 mm though without significant discomfort. On opening, she has a loud audible pop in the right joint at about 25 mm and closing pop that is audible at about 15 mm. Left joint seems to function relatively smoothly. Excursive movement to the right was 10 mm and to the left 13 mm but with a loud audible pop.

Transverse occlusal plane appears relatively level with the pupillary plane.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses look fairly clear. Difficult to evaluate the turbinates. She is missing all four third molars and congenitally missing the upper lateral incisors with dental implants to replace the maxillary lateral incisors. She has a 3 x 3 retainer on the bottom. <PERSON> appear a little bit arthritic. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. <LOCATION> appear to be moderate in size and appears to be a good airway bilaterally. The maxillary lateral incisor implants are seen. Jaws appear relatively symmetrical. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears fairly small in size and appears to have some flattening on the posterior head and some peaking on the superior aspect. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Appears to be some anterior beaking of the condyle. Appears to be decreased joint space posteriorly, superiorly, and also anteriorly. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is very narrow anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately steep. <PERSON> is posteriorly positioned in the fossa with a decreased posterior and superior joint space. There is an increased anterior joint space. 

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Cephalometrically, the head is tilted up quite a ways, but it appears to be basically a Class I skeletal and occasional relationship. Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal. <LOCATION> extend back just slightly beyond the posterior aspect of the hard palate. There is a little vertical asymmetry between the left and right inferior border of the mandible and at the occlusal plane. 

Basic Diagnoses

    1. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc with reduction
    2. Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
    3. Relative mandibular hyperplasia
    4. TMJ pain
    5. Headaches 
    6. Myofascial pain
    7. Difficulties eating and chewing

Recommended Treatment

    1. Presurgical orthodontics 
        A. Place appliances on the maxillary arch
        B. Place appliances on the mandibular arch

    2. Surgery
        A. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
        <LOCATION> mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and make space within the TMJs for the articular discs

    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

