<PERSON> 03/05/2007

<PERSON> is 58 years old and is referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 12210
Pecan <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION> 78727. She has had previous problems with
occipital neuralgia and she has had previous foot surgery. She has had
several operations on her feet for a neuroma development. She has also
had double bunionectomies.

<PERSON> wore orthodontic appliances for about a year and a half before
her first surgery. Her first surgery was done on October 2, 1985, by Dr.
<PERSON> in <LOCATION>, <LOCATION>. She developed problems after that but in the
meantime had moved to the <LOCATION> area. There she saw Dr. <PERSON>. In May of 1987 Dr. <PERSON> performed a bilateral TMJ arthroscopy and
an arthroplasty in the left joint with temporal fascial graft. Following
the first surgery and for about 5 to 7 years, <PERSON> had physical therapy
and biofeedback treatments to try and control her pain. After some time
she then began to be very tolerant of her situation. About 5 weeks ago
she started to have significant difficulties once again such as
excruciating pain predominately on the left side. Even moving her tongue
from side-to-side would create excruciating pain for her on the left
side. By limiting her jaw function to primarily a liquid diet, she has
been able to calm her situation down.

In addition, <PERSON> has fibromyalgia and hypoglycemia. She also has a
seizure disorder that is triggered by nausea followed by fainting and
then the seizures. Apparently, any type of narcotic can create this
problem for her. Treatments she has had to date for her jaw problem
includes splints, bite plates, previous orthodontics, the mandibular
ramus osteotomies, TMJ arthroscopies and left arthroplasty and then the
years of physical therapy and biofeedback. Additional surgery she has
had includes complete gingivectomy. She has worn over the years about 20
different splints. The splints always made her situation worse and
finally she got rid of them and said she does feel better. The other
joints that bother include her hands, feet, neck and fingers. She is not
aware of clenching and bruxism. She gets periodic earaches, occasional
tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss. She does have some mild snoring
tendencies and she does have some daytime tiredness. She and her husband
are unaware of any sleep apnea problems.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 2.5 mm. Maxillary, mandibular and <PERSON> are all pretty
much aligned with each other. In profile view, she has fairly good
balance between the upper lips, cheeks and nose. The chin appears
retruded. Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not
well defined. Upper lip may be just slightly retruded by 2 to 3 mm. <PERSON>
is retruded by approximately 15 mm. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her
lower teeth back through the second molars. She has crowns on her left
first second molar and right first molar. In the upper arch, she has all
of her teeth back through the second molars. She has crowns on the first
and second molars. She is essentially a Class I cuspid molar
relationship bilaterally. She has about a 4 mm anterior deep bite. The
uvula and soft palate appear normal. The faucial pillars may be just
slightly constricted but not too significant. Intranasally, the septum
is deviated off to the left side. The turbinates are of moderate size.
Airway appears reasonably good on the right side. There is some slight
constriction on the left side. There is perhaps some mild constriction
of the nasal airway on the left side. The right side appears as though
it should be relatively normal function. To palpation, she has some mild
tenderness over the masseter muscles and TMJs on the left, a little bit
worse on the right and in the right styloid area.

<PERSON> 03/05/2007 <PERSON> opening is about 33 mm and opening without significant pain is
about 15 mm.

Excursive movement to the right is 6 mm, to the left 5 mm. In excursive
movement she had quite a bit of discomfort particularly in the left TMJ.


Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. She has root canals on
the mandibular left first and second molars and maxillary left first and
second molars and maxillary right second molar. She has crowns on all
the first and second molars in all 4 quadrants except for the mandibular
right second molar. She has 3 bone screws in the left ramus and 2 bone
screws in the right ramus from previous surgery. Both condyles appear
quite arthritic with the left side being worse than the right side.
Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. The bony
septum appears reasonably straight. There appears to be a little bit
more obstruction in the nose on the left side as compared to the right
side. Bone screws can be seen, 3 in the left ramus and 2 in the right
ramus.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that she has severe arthritis in the left TMJ.
<PERSON> is severely deformed and resorbed. A little sclerosis on the
top. Posterior extending osteophyte is present. Articular eminence is
moderately steep. It appears there may be some decreased distance
between some of the bony structures in the condyle and the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a joint that is arthritic. There is some
flattening on the posterior head of the condyle and the head appears
smaller in size than normal. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On
opening, there is restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II
jaw relationship and a high occlusal plane angle. She has decreased
oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of about 6 mm at the soft
palate level and about 5.5 mm at the base of the tongue. There is a
vertical difference in the height at the inferior border of the mandible
with one side being about 5 mm vertically than the opposite side.
Clinically, it appears that the left side of the mandible is shorter
vertically than the right side.

MRI: Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears fairly
arthritic and sclerotic. There may be some bone-on-bone contact. On
opening, there is translation. The extent of the degeneration on the
condylar head is quite extensive. On opening, there is fairly good
translation of the condyle on this side. There is a large fluid cystic
space in the bilaminar tissues. The top of the condyle appears quite
sclerotic. Translation is actually moderately good with it coming out
towards the inferior aspect of the articular eminence. No evidence of
discal tissue present but in the open view there appears to be some
compressed soft tissue. This could be residual factors of the temporal
fascia graft.

<PERSON> 03/05/2007 Page 3

Right TMJ shows a condyle that is arthritic but not as severe as the
left side. Disc appears to be anteriorly displaced sitting beneath the
articular eminence. Condylar head lights up significantly and it appears
that there is a large mass of fluid in the joint space. It appears that
the disc is identifiable but positioned anteriorly and somewhat
deformed. Right TMJ shows that there appears to still be some anterior
displaced disc and some restricted function. There is moderately good
translation of the condyle but the articular disc remains anteriorly
displaced without reduction.

Left coronal view shows that there is severe resorptive arthritis that
has occurred in this joint with loss of volume. There are osteophytic
extensions going medial off the remaining condylar head and lateral off
the lateral pole of the condyle that actually extends out even to the
lateral rim of the fossa. There is osteophytic bone also that has
developed up in the fossa area. No evidence of discal tissue on this
side.

Right TMJ coronal view shows likewise the condyle has lost significant
volume. There is out lateral as well as medial osteophytic developments.
There is significant decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the
joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3
to 4 mm. It actually appears that there may be a little bit of
heterotopic bone growing vertically off the lateral rim of the fossa
that overlaps the had of the condyle.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows significant degenerative changes and
obliteration of the joint space with possible bone-on-bone contact. In
the right on opening there is non-reducing disc and the disc appears
fairly degenerated.

Left TMJ sagittal view there is no evidence of any discal tissue.


1.  Left TMJ severe arthritis and no evidence of articular disc
    structures.

2.  Right TMJ arthritis (not as severe as the left side) but with
    anterior articular disc dislocation without reduction. Clinically
    the transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.


1.  <LOCATION> arthritis.

2.  AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

5.  High occlusal plane angle.

6.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

7.  Severe TMJ pain.

8.  Myofascial pain.

9.  Headaches.

<PERSON> 03/05/2007 <PERSON>.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  CT scans of jaw joints and jaw.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance it down and down graft the
        maxilla posteriorly.

    c.  <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    d.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    e.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

The second surgical treatment option would be to reconstruct the TMJs
with total joint prostheses and place the fat grafts and not perform the
maxillary osteotomies. This will result in a compromised result but
would eliminate her primary concerns.
