<PERSON> 07/14/2008

<PERSON> is 19 years old and referred by <PERSON>, DDS, 17300 <PERSON> 40, Suite 103, <LOCATION>, MO 63005. <PERSON> is in good health

1.  Limited range of motion in the jaw.

2.  Severe pain when eating and chewing.

3.  Frequent headaches and earaches.

4.  Left joint pops.

5.  Right side used to pop, but no longer does.

6.  Pain worse in the right jaw as compared to the left side.


1.  <PERSON>.  Lexapro.

<PERSON>'s goals will be to be to reduce her jaw pain, eliminate the
headaches and earaches as well as increase mobility of the jaws. She
also has some cartilage problems in her joints, particularly in the
knees and shoulders. The only treatment she has basically had for her
jaws so far has been a splint made in November 2007 by Dr. <PERSON>,
800 W. University, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION> 47303. <PERSON> gets headaches in the
frontotemporal area bilaterally at about a level of 5. She rates her TMJ
at 7, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 6, and
disability at 4. <PERSON> gets some earaches and vertigo. The other
joints that bother her include her knees, elbows, and shoulders. She has
had a previous hip injury, but that is doing okay now. She does clench
her teeth at night.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION: In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The maxillary and mandibular
dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline. The chin is also
fairly close to being on the facial midline and may be just about 1 mm
off to the right. In profile view, upper lip supralabale is about 2 mm
posterior to subnasale. <PERSON> appears to be deficient by probably 4 to
5 mm. <PERSON> is retruded by 12 to 15 mm. <PERSON> neckline is shorter,
although the chin neckline angle is moderately well defined. She has
moderate head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, <PERSON> has
all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has
retained primary E on the left side without a successor. In the upper
arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present.
She is basically a slight Class II end-on occlusion being 2 mm Class II
bilaterally. Anterior deep bite is about 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues
look relatively normal, although the posterior fascial pillar is a
little posteriorly positioned. Septum is deviated a little bit off
towards the left side. Turbinate on the left side may be just slightly
enlarged. The right side is pretty much normal. Airway appears more
constricted on the left side as compared to the right side. The
columella is moderately wide and the nostrils are somewhat narrow.
<PERSON> became aware of having jaw joint problems particularly with
tenderness and clicking around the jaw joints about the age of 14 of
10 through age 15. There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusal
plane with the right side being about 1 mm higher than the left side. To
palpation, she has moderate pain in the masseters, TMJs, and right
retromandibular area. She has moderate tenderness over the temporalis
muscles and shoulders. On opening, she has a soft pop in the left joint
at about 10 to 15 mm of opening and closing about 5 to 10 mm. She has
some fine crepitus in the right joint on opening.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all third molars.
She has a retained primary E in the left side absent a successor tooth.
Sinuses look relatively clear. The condyles do not appear to abnormal.

Waters view shows that she has a significant deviation in the septum and
spurring off towards the left side in the bony aspect of the nasal
cavity with significant decreased airway on the left side. Sinuses
appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat arthritic.
There is some anterior beaking present and there appears to be some loss
of vertical height. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Joint
space may be slightly decreased.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking and the
condyle appears to be a little bit more posteriorly displaced in the
fossa. Moderate inclination of the articular eminence. On opening, there
is moderately good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are
both retruded. She has a high occlusal plane angle, however,
oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal.


1.  Bilateral TMJ AICR.

2.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without
    reduction.

3.  Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.

4.  AP mandibular deficiency.

5.  AP maxillary deficiency.

6.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

7.  High occlusal plane angle.

8.  Deviated nasal septum.

9.  AP microgenia.

10. TMJ pain.

11. Headaches.

12. Myofascial pain.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Place appliances on the maxillary and mandibular arch.

    b.  Try to work up to a reasonable size archwire for surgery.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it and down graft it
          posteriorly.

    d.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.

    e.  Nasal septoplasty.

3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
