<PERSON> 10-01-03

Terri is 40 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 670 W.
Campbell Road, #120, <LOCATION>, <LOCATION> 75080.

1.  Patient History

<PERSON> has had a lot of previous TMJ surgeries including 9 surgeries.
<PERSON>’s problems with her joints began in high school, where she had
clicking and popping and headache problems. In 1984, she was under the
care of Dr. <PERSON> and was wearing splints. She was to have some
TMJ surgery done at HEB Hospital by Dr. <PERSON>, but somehow the
nurse anesthetist gave her some Pavulon, and she became paralyzed and
had a respiratory arrest in the holding room. She then switched to Dr.
<PERSON> in <LOCATION>. In May of 1985, Dr. <PERSON> did bilateral TMJ
articular disc tie-back procedures. Her problems got worse, and he took
her back to surgery in August of 1985 and placed bilateral silastic
implants. She developed a fairly significant anterior open bite. He then
took her back to surgery in January of 1986 and performed maxillary
osteotomies to close the open bite, but it didn’t turn out well, and the
bite was even worse, and so he took her back to surgery in March of 1986
and performed bilateral sagittal split osteotomies to advance the
mandible forward. Later in 1986, he did bilateral TMJ surgery again to
remove the silastic implants. All those times she continued to have some
significant pain problems and headaches. In February of 1987, Dr. <PERSON>
placed bilateral Vitek total joint prostheses. By 1983, she was in
severe pain again and had a significant decrease in her incisal opening.
Dr. <PERSON> kept telling her that the joints looked good radiographically.

Finally in 1998, she saw Dr. <PERSON> here in <LOCATION>, who opened one
side for an exploration and apparently told her that it was beyond what
he was capable of doing, and he just closed up, and she was awake again
within 15 minutes. Dr. <PERSON> then apparently had conferences with Dr.
<PERSON> and Dr. <PERSON>, and Dr. <PERSON> agreed to try to help
<PERSON>. In May of 1998, Dr. <PERSON> placed bilateral Biomet prostheses.
There apparently was some problem with the alignment of the prostheses
and/or the jaws, and they put her asleep and did some manipulations and
then wired her together for three months. Apparently the bite was still
off, so in November of 1998 Dr. <PERSON> performed a right sagittal split
osteotomy to try to improve the alignment of the jaws and then wired the
jaws together again for another six weeks. She did fairly well after
that surgery until August 28, 2003, when she yawned and developed severe
pain predominantly in the left side. She went back to see Dr. <PERSON> on an
emergency basis, and he opened the left joint in the office and
according to <PERSON> sanded the fossa. <PERSON> has had no improvement; in
fact, her pain levels are continuing to worsen. She is here for another
opinion. Dr. <PERSON> did obtain a CT scan, which we will review.

<PERSON> has significant immune disorder and receives Ig IV. She has common
variable immunodeficiency (CVID). She also has low IgA levels. During
the past five years, she has had lot of problems with pneumonia. She has
had it at least five times. She has chronic sinus problems as well. She
was hospitalized for one bout for 23 days. She has a kidney problem that
they have diagnosed as FSGS, which is focal segmental glomerular
sclerosis, which is an autoimmune condition. After that she was treated
with prednisone and cyclosporin as an immune system suppressor. This
condition causes the passage of protein in large amounts through the
urinary system. She has had problems in the past with stomach ulcers and
has problems with diarrhea. The stomach ulcers have cleared now. She has
had anemia off and on. <PERSON> also apparently has some kind of platelet
disorder where the platelets have an abnormal shape to them. She has a
sister who is 10 years old who also has TMJ problems and also has had
previous Proplast Teflon in one jaw joint and has similar kind of
symptoms that <PERSON> has. Her sister has also had multiple surgeries in
the affected jaw joint.

3.  Current Medications

1.  Lexapro 15 mg

2.  OxyContin 10 mg b.i.d.

3.  Benadryl 25 mg which she has to take with any pain medication. She
    essentially breaks out with any pain medicine

4.  Zonegran 100 mg q.d.

5.  Seroquel 100 mg q.d.

6.  Phenergan 25 mg p.r.n. nausea

7.  Soma 350 mg 4 per day

Allergies

<PERSON> has had a lot of allergic reactions to medications, and they
include the following: MORPHINE, CODEINE, TALWIN, HYDROCODONE,
COMPAZINE, BACLOFEN, VICODIN, PERCODAN, AND MOST ALL PAIN MEDICATIONS.
Last week she had a rather severe reaction to baclofen. At that time,
Dr. <PERSON> suggested that she go into a psychiatric ward. On the baclofen,
she had problems with hallucinations and a lot of problems with cycling
through depression and crying and so forth.

1.  

    Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has increased fullness on the right side of the
face compared to the left side. The left side appears to be probably 8
to 10 mm deficient compared to the right angle of the mandible. Upper
lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2
mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular
dental midline is a couple of millimeters off toward the right side as
is the chin which is 2 to 3 mm off to the right side.

In profile view, she may have just some slight AP maxillary deficiency
and may be probably 5 to 8 mm of AP mandibular deficiency. Chin-neckline
is short and not well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. Some mild crowding, lower anterior teeth. Has fairly good
attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth but has a high labial
frenulum that attaches right in between the two lower central incisors.
In the upper jaw, she has all of her teeth back through the second
molars. She has a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side
by about 2 mm, and on the left side she is fairly close to being Class
I. Some malrotations of the upper left cuspid. Has a slight transverse
cant in the occlusion with the right side being a millimeter or 2 lower
than the left side.

<PERSON> rates her TMJ pain at 10, overall facial pain currently on an
average day at about 10, jaw function, diet, and disability all at 8.
She gets headaches about two times a week in the frontal, temporal, and
posterior head area at about a level of 8. Her incisal opening is 22
maximum, and she stops because of severe pain. Amount of opening without
any significant pain is only about 5 mm or so. Excursive movements are
very minimal with probably less than 0.5 mm in each direction. About two
years ago, her incisal opening was about 41 mm. To palpation, she has
severe pain over the TMJs, medial pterygoids, SCMs, left styloid area,
high moderate pain over the masseters, right styloid area, and moderate
pain over the posterior neck and temporalis muscle areas.

She is missing all four third molars. She has root canals on the
maxillary right lateral incisor, cuspid, and left second bicuspid. She
said these occurred after the upper jaw surgery, and apparently she had
a lot of problems with those teeth almost immediately after surgery and
had to have the root canals done.

Radiographic Evaluation

Sinuses as best I can see appear reasonably clear. Probably some carry
over from the prostheses mask the clarity. She has bilateral Biomet
total joint protheses in place with both the fossas and mandibular
components. On the left side, the mandibular component is positioned
somewhat anterior. <PERSON> appear to be stabilized with three bone screws
on the left side and four bone screws on the right side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses do appear relatively clear.
Prostheses are positioned perhaps a little bit toward the right side,
and the angle of the mandible is rotated in toward the right side. The
whole maxilla appears to be rotated the posterior aspect off toward the
right side, and this may account for some of the asymmetry noted in the
frontal view. Screws all appear to be position on the prostheses.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the prosthesis in place. Not too much thickness
between the fossa. There may be some bone cement up in there as there
appears to be thick white mantling along the articular eminence and in
the base of the fossa. Difficult to tell if there is reactive bone, but
there is a little bit of shadow in front of the condyle that might hint
that.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of again what appears to be some
bone cement in the fossa and along the flattened articular eminence.
Both articular eminences apparently have been ground down. The condyle
appears more anteriorly positioned in this fossa as compared to the
opposite side and is compared to the position of the internal meatus.

Cephalometrically, she has a little bit of a high occlusal plane angle.
Oropharyngeal airway is probably moderate size. At least in the profile
view she appears to have fairly close to a skeletal Class I and occlusal
Class I relationship. Left condyle and probably the fossa are more
anteriorly positioned than the right side.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Probable fractured fossa component, left TMJ prosthesis

2.  <LOCATION> localized foreign body giant cell reaction

3.  <LOCATION> severe pain

4.  Severe headaches

5.  Moderate to severe myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

1.  Blood test to evaluate for Chlamydia group antibody titers and
    Mycoplasma pneumoniae antibody titer

2.  Pain control

    A.  OxyContin 20 mg, 1 tablet b.i.d., disp. 30

    B.  Referral to Dr. <PERSON> for pain management

3.  Tomograms of TMJ both sagittal and coronal views

4.  Evaluation at <LOCATION> for hypersensitivities to
    materials in the prostheses

5.  Surgery

    A.  <LOCATION> removal of current prostheses

    B.  <LOCATION> reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
        prostheses

    C.  Fat grafts to bilateral TMJs

    D.  Application of arch bars to control occlusion

6.  Continued pain management as necessary posttreatment

Dr. <PERSON> apparently told <PERSON> that the fossa component is broken, and
he is suggesting it be changed out and the same type of fossa replaced.
I feel in the long term that she would do much better with replacement
of both devices. She says other patients that she knows of that have
that device have also had problems. One patient in fact committed
suicide because of her severe pain problems and depression. Another
patient that had the devices placed had them removed. She is now the
longest followup for Dr. <PERSON> with the devices still remaining. She was
very receptive to our treatment recommendations. I did tell her that Dr.
<PERSON> could put in the devices also. She may prefer to come here, and if
so, we will be happy to work with her and help her.
