<PERSON> (SMITH) 02/03/2006

<PERSON> is 41 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 10900 Hefner Point
Dr., <PERSON>. 204, <LOCATION>, OK, 73120.


1.  Chronic pain.

2.  Chronic functional problems with the jaws.

3.  Sleep apnea.

4.  TMJ pain.

5.  Headaches.

6.  Muscle pain and spasms.

7.  Pain down through the neck and shoulders.

8.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

9.  Difficulties swallowing.

10. Speech affected.

11. GI problems.


1.  August of 1990, hysterectomy.

2.  December 1994, multiple facial fractures shattered lower right
    quadrant (jaw.)

3.  October 1995, bone graft and steel plate to the jaws.

4.  December 2000, surgery to unload jaw joints.

She smokes one pack of cigarettes per day and has done this for 20
years. She had hepatitis at the age of 20.


1.  Aciphex.

2.  OxyContin 40 mg b.i.d.

3.  Effexor 75 mg per day.

4.  Zelnorm 6 mg b.i.d.

5.  Lortab p.r.n. breakthrough pain.

6.  Soma at night and may take one during the day.

7.  Lunesta p.r.n.

Codeine causes vomiting but she apparently has no other drug reactions
known.

<PERSON> does have a CPAP machine but she has significant difficulties in
using it and keeping it in place and having it function. She wakes up at
times with a lot of air in her stomach likely from the machine. She says
that it tends to make her feel like the back of her throat is being
closed off.

<PERSON>'s problems began in December of 1994 when she was involved in a
motor vehicle accident sustaining multiple mid facial and mandibular
fractures. She had open reduction internal fixation in 1994 of the
facial fractures.

KELLY LYDE 02/03/2006 Page 2

She then had dental reconstruction done. She did reasonably well until
about 1998 when her headaches began. In June of 2000, Dr. <PERSON>
performed what sounds like vertical oblique osteotomies to "create joint
space" in the joints. This was not very successful. <PERSON> in addition
has gone through some significant physical therapy and she also has had
previous splints that have not worked for her. <PERSON> has some decreased
sensation to the right lower lip and chin area secondary to a previous
bone graft that was placed to help rebuild the right side of her jaw.
She gets daily headaches at a level of 7 in the frontal, temple and
posterior head area. She wakes up with a headache everyday. She has TMJ
pain she rates at a level of 8, average daily facial pain at 8, jaw
function and diet at 4 and disability at 7.

<PERSON> has significant problems with snoring that is rated at a moderate
to severe level. She has daytime somnolence of moderate to severe
levels. She has moderate to severe sleep apnea and in addition has a
sleep disorder and cannot sleep more than two hours at a time. To
palpation, she has moderate discomfort over the temporalis and milder
tenderness over the TMJs, shoulders, moderate tenderness over the left
styloid area. Maximal incisal opening is about 39 mm of opening, without
significant pain 20 mm. Excursive movement to the right about 5 mm, to
the left 7 mm.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper
third face. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip
relationship is 1. Maxillary midline is fairly close to being on the
facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is about 2 to 3 mm to the
right. <PERSON> and mandibular dental midline are fairly well aligned and
chin is also off to the right. In profile view, upper lip is probably
retruded by probably 3 to 4 mm. The chin is retruded by 20 to 25 mm.
<PERSON> neck-line and chin-neck angle are not well defined. <PERSON> has a
head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, <PERSON> is missing teeth
on the left central incisor back through the first molar on the right
side. The second molar is in place. She has a removable partial denture
to replace the missing teeth. She is missing the two central incisors
and the right lateral incisor. <PERSON> has a Class II occlusal
relationship. She has about 2 mm anterior overbite and an overjet of
about 4 mm. She is a full Class II. She has a crossbite on the right
side and a tendency towards the buccal crossbite on the left side. The
uvula, soft palate and the faucial pillars all appear relatively normal.
The tissues appear fairly healthy. Intranasally, the turbinates appear
relatively normal in size. She appears to have an adequate airway. The
septum appears relatively straight. The columella is somewhat wide at
the base. The nostrils are a little bit narrow. The luminal valves are
probably okay.


Panorex shows the sinuses appear relatively clear. She is missing the
following teeth. Maxillary right third molar, left third molar and first
molar replaced by a Pontic as well as the two central incisors and the
right lateral incisor. She has root canals on the maxillary right
cuspid, first bicuspid, left lateral incisor cuspid. In the lower arch
she has root canal on the lower bicuspids. In the lower arch she is
missing the left second third molar, left central incisor, right central
incisor, lateral incisor, second bicuspid and first molar but she does
have her right cuspid, partial overlay on top of the right cuspid and
first bicuspid.

KELLY LYDE 02/03/2006 Page 3

There is a plate in the mandibular right body area. Joints look
arthritic with the left one being much more arthritic appearing than the
right side. <PERSON> has a tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s
difference of 4 mm.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The septum is relatively
straight but it could be septal spur posteriorly on the left side. The
turbinates are moderate in size. It appears that there is adequate
airway.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there appears to be some arthritic changes
in this joint with flattening at the head of the condyle and decreased
joint space vertically. Articular eminence is moderate steep. The
styloid processes are fairly prominent.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a joint that is quite arthritic. Joint space is
very difficult to identify. Articular eminence is moderately steep. The
condyle is actually postured forward in the fossa. On opening, there is
moderately good translation in the joints. The styloid process on the
right side is more prominent that what I can see on the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a retruded
mandible. The occlusal plane is moderately high but not real severe. The
oropharyngeal airway measures a little bit less than 3 mm at the soft
palate level and about 5 mm at the base of the tongue. She has a bone
plate in the mandible and she has an impacted third molar in the
mandible as well. She has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship.


1.  <LOCATION> severe arthritis with the left side worse than the
    right side.

2.  Severe AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

5.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

6.  Class II occlusion.

7.  Missing maxillary central incisors, right lateral incisor, left
    first molar and bilateral third molars as well as mandibular left
    central incisor, right central and lateral incisors, second
    bicuspid, first and third molars and the left second and third
    molars.

8.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of only 3 mm AP dimension
    (normal 11 mm.)

9.  Severe snoring.

10. Moderate to severe daytime somnolence.

11. Moderate to severe sleep apnea.

12. Sleep disorder with inability to sleep more than two hours at a
    time.

13. TMJ pain.

14. Headaches.

15. Myofascial pain.

16. Masticatory dysfunction.

17. Speech affected.

KELLY LYDE 02/03/2006 Page 4


1.  CT scan of TMJs, maxilla and mandible following TMJ Concepts
    protocol.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral mandibular condylectomy, debridement, reconstruction
        and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint
        prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward,
        down graft it posteriorly and expand it.

    c.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    d.  <LOCATION> fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    e.  Placement of arch bars.

    f.  Restorative dentistry to improve facial balance.
