<PERSON> 04/27/2007

<PERSON> is 14 years and 10-1/2 months of age. Her orthodontist is Dr.
<PERSON>, Rio Tiber 100-4, <LOCATION>, <PERSON>
<PERSON>. <PERSON> began orthodontic treatment in about 2001
and finished in December of 2006. She takes no medications. She has no
problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. She has no
joint problems. She has no history of TMJ problems. She has no problems
with headaches, TMJ pain or myofascial pain around the head and neck
area. She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0. She has no
problem with numbness.

In frontal view, upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip
relationship is 5 to 6 mm. Maxillary dental midline, mandibular dental
midline and chin are pretty much on the facial midline. The nasal tip
may be just 1 mm off to the right side. Lip incompetence is about 9 to
10 mm. In profile view, upper lip is C-shaped and maxilla pillars are
retruded by 3 to 4 mm. She has some infraorbital hypoplasia of about 4
mm. <PERSON> appears retruded by about 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is short
although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. The lower third
face appears somewhat elongated. Intraorally, she has all of her lower
teeth back through the second molars. Teeth are fairly well aligned.
Lower incisors appear somewhat over-angulated. Transverse width in the
molar and bicuspid area appears a little bit narrow. She is developing a
little bit of lingual tori. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth
back through the second molars present. Teeth likewise are fairly well
aligned. Upper lateral incisors appear somewhat enlarged particularly
the right one. She is just slightly a Class II by maybe 1 to 2 mm. She
has a vertical overbite of about 2 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look
reasonably healthy. The uvula may be a little bit elongated. Soft palate
appears moderately elongated. Faucial pillars appear significantly
constricted and the tonsils are fairly large particularly the left one
moreso than the right one. This seems to contribute to the narrowing of
the faucial pillars and posterior positioning of the pillars.
Intranasally, the septum is deviated off towards the right side.
<LOCATION> are moderately enlarged with the left one being larger than
the right one. <PERSON> is somewhat wide and nostrils are somewhat
narrow. <PERSON> is not aware of having problems with snoring, daytime
somnolence or sleep apnea. To palpation, she has no tenderness around
the head and neck area. Joints function relatively smoothly. Incisal
opening is 58 mm. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in each direction.


Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but all the rest of the
teeth are present. Sinuses appear relatively clear. <PERSON> appear
maybe a little bit short in vertical height.

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated significantly off towards
the right side with a bony spur on the right side. Turbinates appear
significantly enlarged. There does not appear to be much airway present.
Sinuses appear clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. The
condylar neck appears somewhat short. Joint space may be a little
decreased. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of a
hockey stick shape to it.
There may be some decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence
appears a little bit steeper on this side than the opposite side. On
opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

<PERSON> 04/27/2007 Page 2

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has an anterior
vertical maxillary excess and a posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
The mandible appears AP deficient. Oropharyngeal airway is quite large.
She does have what appears to be relatively large tonsils. She has a
little bit of adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx but not too significant.
She has a high occlusal plane angle and significant lip incompetence.
Lip incompetence cephalometrically measures about 12 mm. She had some
problems in the nasal dorsum and appears to have a C-shaped curve to the
upper lip.


1.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  AP mandibular deficiency.

5.  AP microgenia.

6.  Class II end-on occlusion.

7.  Over-angulated lower incisors and to a lesser degree the upper
    incisors.

8.  Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 2 mm.

9.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

10. Nasoseptal deviation with a spur off to the right side.

11. Nasal airway obstruction.

12. External nasal deformity.

13. High occlusal plane angulation.

14. Rule out TMJ pathology.


1.  MRI of left and right TMJ to rule out TMJ pathology.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the
        significant tooth size discrepancy and retract. Try to gently
        expand the lower arch in the bicuspid and first molar area with
        very low forces overtime.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla
        superiorly. Reposition the posterior aspect inferiorly to level
        the occlusal plane with slight advancement.

    <PERSON> osteotomies to advance the mandible in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Augmentation genioplasty of 5 mm.

    d.  <LOCATION>.

    e.  Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies.

    f.  External rhinoplasty.

    g.  TMJ surgery if indicated based on MRI findings.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
