<PERSON> 10/16/2006

<PERSON> is 27 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON> 2709 <PERSON>., <LOCATION>, <LOCATION> 72762. <PERSON> has had her wisdom teeth
extracted but has had no other surgeries. She is in good health.


1.  Valium 5 to 10 mg at night.

2.  Trazodone 150 mg at night.

3.  Ultracet 2 tablets twice daily.

<PERSON>'s TMJ problems began in 2003 when she became aware of clicking
worse. On November 17, 2005, she began orthodontic treatment for TMJ
related problems. In 2005, earlier on she also had 3 splints made, none
of which corrected her problems. Orthodontics also has not controlled
her pain problems. She has been in pain management and several different
pain medications have been used without good effect. She currently takes
the Valium, trazodone and <PERSON> although she feels that these
medications are beginning to fail as well in keeping her reasonably
comfortable. She rates her daily TMJ pain at a level of 9 with the right
side worse than the left side. Average daily pain 7, jaw function 7,
diet 9, disability at 8. She gets daily headaches at about a level of 9
that occur in the frontal, temple, posterior head and top of the head
bilaterally. She gets earaches, right side worse than the left side and
gets occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo. With her headaches she
does experience decreased hearing but otherwise is relatively normal. No
other joints bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at
nighttime and also during the day. She is aware of snoring and some
difficulties breathing through her nose particularly at night. She has
some daytime tiredness but is not aware of any sleep apnea factors. She
had her wisdom teeth extracted in October of 2005. Spends a lot of time
in bed and misses a lot of work related to her severe TMJ related pain
and headache problems.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 5.5 mm. Nasal tip is a little bit off the right side by probably a
1 or 2 mm. Maxillary midline is off to the left about 1 mm. Mandibular
dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. In
profile view, she has a C-shaped curve to the upper lip. Upper lip
supralabrale is slightly posterior to subnasale with probably 3 mm of AP
deficiency in the maxilla. <PERSON> has lip incompetence of about 9 mm.
<PERSON> appears to be retruded about 12 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is quite
short although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. She has a
high mandibular occlusal plane angle facial morphology. Intraorally,
<PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. Also,
in the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the second
molars. She has a Class II end-on (5-6 mm) occlusion and has probably a
4 mm overjet relationship and 0 overbite. In centric relation, she
occludes only on the right second bicuspid, first and second molars and
all other teeth are out of occlusion. Oropharyngeal tissues all look
healthy and normal including the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars.
Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size as best as
can be seen. Septum is deviated off towards the left side. She has very
narrow nostrils and relatively wide columella. The luminal valves are
somewhat constricted. Using a scope and holding the nostril open
significantly improved <PERSON>'s ability to breathe through her nose.

<PERSON> 10/16/2006 Page 2

To palpation, she has severe pain over the masseters, TMJ, styloid areas
and shoulders with high moderate pain over the medial pterygoids,
temporalis and moderate tenderness over the SCMs. Maximal incisal
opening is 57 mm but without significant pain and discomfort only 14 mm.
Excursive movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 10 mm. Opening pops
somewhere between 35 and 40 mm of opening on both sides with the left
side occurring probably slightly before the right side and closing pops
in both joints as well somewhere around 20 to 25 mm.


Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but the rest of the
teeth are all present. She has root canal in the mandibular left first
molar. The condyles appear a little bit arthritic. Difficult to evaluate
the sinuses and nasal airway.

Waters view shows that the septum is deviated a little bit off towards
the left side. <LOCATION> appear relatively normal in size and nasal
airway appears reasonably good at least back by the bony septum although
there is a spur coming off the left side of the bony septum blocking
part of the airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit sclerotic
on top. There is decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular
eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that does also appear a little bit
sclerotic and there appears to be decreased superior and posterior joint
space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is good
translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a skeletal Class
II occlusal relationship. Both the maxilla and mandible appear to be
retruded. She has an overbite of probably about 4 to 5 mm. Oropharyngeal
airway actually looks fairly good. Occlusal plane actually looks
reasonably normal. She does have vertical maxillary excess and AP
mandibular deficiency. <PERSON> does have bilateral posterior crossbites
due to transverse maxillary deficiency.


1.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

4.  AP mandibular deficiency.

5.  Class II occlusion.

6.  Anterior open bite.

7.  Occluding only on the right second bicuspid, first and second molars
    and all other teeth are out of occlusion.

8.  Bilateral posterior crossbites.

9.  Severe headaches.

10. Severe TMJ pain.

<PERSON> 10/16/2006 Page 3

11. Severe myofascial pain.

12. Deviated nasal septum.

13. Narrow nostrils.

14. Wide columella.

15. Nasal airway obstruction.

16. Snoring.


1.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Try to level the
    marginal ridges of the bicuspids and molars with each other.

2.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  <LOCATION> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly, expand it
        and advance it slightly.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.

    d.  Nasal septoplasty.

    e.  Reconstruct columella.

4.  Post-surgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
