JANNINA NIKA 07/02/2007

<PERSON> is 39 years. <PERSON> has had jaw problems since 1999. She had a
malocclusion at that time and underwent orthognathic surgery where the
maxilla was moved backwards and the mandible was moved forwards.
Following the surgery she had significant problems with facial swelling,
inability to open the jaw and function the jaw as well as significant
pain problems. Her doctor, Dr. <PERSON>, felt it was related to
some screws so in 2000, he took her back to surgery and removed the
screws. Most of the screws were from the jaw area but this had no affect
and she continued with the facial swelling and continued pain. She then
went to see Dr. <PERSON>, at Jefferson Hospital. MRI was taken
showing that the discs were displaced. In 2001, he took <PERSON> back to
surgery where apparently he identified a nonunion in the upper jaw and
did some bone grafting. In addition, <PERSON> has undergone 6 to 7
bilateral TMJ arthroscopies. Another doctor was going to do a laser
surgery on her joints but by that time they were unable to enter the
joints.


1.  Teeth hurt and are loose.

2.  Vestibular problems.

3.  Nerve damage.

4.  Bad smell always present in her nose.

5.  Decreased hearing with the left worse than the right.

6.  Tongue feels constricted.

7.  <PERSON> with mouth open.

8.  Breathes heavy.

9.  Difficult to eat and chew.

10. Pain all day long in the face.

11. As the jaw opens, her mandible shifts towards the right side.

12. She has had teeth pulled for pain without resolution.

13. Headaches.

14. Painful to smile.


1.  Percocet 10/650, 2 q.4h.

2.  OxyContin 80 mg b.i.d.

3.  Celexa 20 mg daily.

4.  Trazodone 50 mg q.h.s.

5.  Xanax 1 mg p.r.n.

6.  <PERSON> (her cancer medication.)

7.  Lyrica t.i.d.

8.  Topamax 25 mg p.r.n.

<PERSON> has been diagnosed with breast cancer and is being treated for
that. She was diagnosed in 2003 and has had radiation therapy and she
had a lumpectomy. They could not give her chemotherapy because of the
jaw, bone and pain problems that she has.

JANNINA NIKA 07/02/2007 Page 2

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
She has a little bit more fullness in the upper lip on the right side as
compared to the left side. Upper lip length is around 22 mm. Upper
tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental
midline are pretty much on the facial midline. <PERSON> may be just slightly
to the left 1 to 2 mm. When <PERSON> relaxes her lower lip, the distance
from her lower lip to her lower incisors is 5 mm. She has hyperfunction
of mentalis muscle when she puts her lips together. In profile view,
<PERSON> appears to have some slight deficiency in upper lip projection.
It appears retruded by probably about 10 mm. She has an obtuse
nasolabial angle. Chin-neckline is short although the chin-neck angle is
reasonably well defined. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth
back through the second molars present. Teeth are fairly well aligned
and leveled. In the upper arch she is missing the first molar on the
left side and on the right side. These teeth were extracted for pain
reasons. She has basically a Class I cuspid relationship. She has about
a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship. Uvula appears relatively normal
as does the length of the soft palate. Faucial pillars appear mild to
moderately constricted. She has a coating on her tongue. <PERSON> states
that she has been on antibiotics about every other month for the past 7
years and she is placed on Diflucan frequently as well.

She has been told that the saliva gland on the right side (submandibular
gland) is nonfunctioning. That area is constantly sore for her. She
apparently tends to run fevers and was put on antibiotics for that
reason. Sometimes she feels better when she is on the antibiotics, other
times cannot tell much difference. Transversely, she may be just
vertically short on the right side maybe 1 mm. Intranasally, the
turbinates appear relatively moderate in size. She has a septal spur off
on the left side that may be causing some slight blockage. However,
<PERSON> says that she does breathe through her mouth most of the time
daytime and at nighttime. <PERSON> is not aware of any snoring problems
but has a lot of daytime somnolence and rates that as a severe level of
tiredness. She does state that she does have some sleep apnea symptoms.
It is difficult for her to sleep at night. She also has problems with
hot flashes. She also has problems with drooling and this sometimes can
wake her up at night as well.

<PERSON> rates headaches that she gets as often as twice a day a level of
8 and they occur in the frontal, temporal, posterior and the top of the
head areas. She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at 8, jaw
function at 8, diet at 7, disability at 10. She has a decreased
sensation in the upper lip, lower lip and cheek areas that are closer to
being numb as compared to having feeling. To palpation, <PERSON> has high
moderate to severe pain over the temporalis, masseters, medial
pterygoids, TMJs, styloid areas, and high moderate over the posterior
neck and shoulder areas. Maximal incisal opening is about 25 mm but
there is really no opening that <PERSON> is comfortable at. As she opens
her jaws, her mandible deviates towards the right side 4 to 5 mm.
Excursive movement to the right is 5 mm and to the left a maximum of 2
mm. <PERSON> has significant crepitation in both joints and occasionally
had a loud cracking kind of noise.

JANNINA NIKA 07/02/2007 Page 3

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and the maxillary
first molars. Some bone loss around the upper anterior teeth. There is a
2 x 3 stabilizing wire in the upper arch. She has a root canal and a
maxillary left second bicuspid, mandibular left first molar. Sinuses
appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ joint shows flattening on the anterior head. There may be a
little osteophyte sticking up superiorly off the condyle.

The right condyle appears quite arthritic with osteophytic formation off
the superior posterior aspect.

Waters view shows that the septum is fairly straight at least posterior
in the bony area. Turbinates are of moderate size. Sinuses are difficult
to tell if they are a little bit cloudy or not.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit narrow
anteroposteriorly. Significantly decreased vertical joint space.
Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have a little bit of
bone extruding from the top of the condyle. There may be a little
roughness in the fossa area as well. Articular eminence is steeper on
this side as compared to the opposite side. Joint space is decreased
superiorly. On opening, there is some translation of the left condyle
coming down towards the posterior aspect of the articular eminence
whereas the right joint shows virtually no translation.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the upper incisors are a
little bit _________. <PERSON> appears retruded. She has a Class I occlusal
relationship. Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.

<PERSON> said that when she would develop pain or facial swelling she
would be put on antibiotics. She said she has been antibiotics about
every other month and then Diflucan is often added.


1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (right side worse than the left
    side.)

2.  Heterotopic bone formation around the right TMJ.

3.  Severe headaches.

4.  Severe TMJ pain.

5.  Myofascial pain.

6.  AP microgenia.

7.  Depressions in the gonial notch being worse on the right side than
    the left side secondary to the previous sagittal split osteotomies.

8.  Slight increased fullness in the right side of the face overlying
    the anterior aspect of the maxilla.

9.  Pain in the anterior maxilla beneath the base of the nose.

10. Missing maxillary first molars.

JANNINA NIKA 07/02/2007 Page 4


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
        prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral fat grafts to the TMJs (harvest from the abdomen.)

    c.  Augmentation genioplasty.

    d.  Resuspension of the mentalis muscles.

    e.  Augmentation of right inferior border of the mandible in the
        agonal notch area.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Dental restorations to include possible osseointegrated implants and
    crowns to replace the missing maxillary first molars.
