<PERSON> is 48 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, St. Louis, MO. She has
had some problems with mild depression. Deb apparently has a lot of
environmental type of allergy problems. She has had some problems with
hayfever.


1.  Evista 60 mg per day.

2.  Lexapro 10 mg per day.

3.  Excedrin ES for headaches.

<PERSON>'s problems began on June 30, 2004. <PERSON> had a bicycle accident
and sustained a fracture of the mandibular symphysis and had a left
subcondylar fracture. Jaws were wired together for about 6 weeks and
then she was wired for 3 more weeks with partial opening. That may have
meant perhaps elastics being used.


1.  Headaches.

2.  TMJ pain.

3.  Heaviness in the jaw joint area.

4.  Difficulty eating and chewing.

5.  Teeth and jaws do not fit together.

<PERSON> has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing
loss. She has some popping in the lower back, but no pain problems
there. Her wrists bother her occasionally. She has environmental
allergies. She does not wear jewelry except for a watch. She is not
aware of any allergy problems with jewelry. She is aware of clenching at
nighttime and also during the day. She gets headaches that she rates at
about a level 6 in the frontotemporal area behind the eyes. She has them
about 3 to 4 times per month. She states they usually last about a day
when she gets them. Before the injury, she did get headaches especially
over her menstrual cycle. Then they went away then she went through
menopause. Then after the injury, the headaches returned again. Although
they average about a level of 6, they can escalate to 10. Relative to
TMJ pain, she does get pain discomfort usually with function and
chewing. About 3 to 4 weeks ago, her pain levels were about a level of
8. On an average day, currently she rates her pain around the head and
neck area at a level of 2, but this excludes the day when she gets her
severe headache problems. She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 7,
disability at 2.

Clinical Evaluation

In the frontal view, she has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
It looks like more fullness on the left side compared to the right side.
Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-lip relationship is about
1/2 mm. Maxillary dental line is pretty much on the facial midline.
Mandibular midline may be about 1 mm to the right side. Mandibular
midline and chin midline are fairly close to being aligned with each
other. In profile view, she may have some slight AP maxillary deficiency
of a couple of millimeters. Mandible is retruded probably 10 to 12 mm.
Chin-neckline is short and the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined.
Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular left first molar and has the
second and third molars drifted forward with significant major
inclination.

DEBORAH NORGARD 2/16/05 Page 2

On the right side, she likewise is probably missing the first molar and
has the second and third molars drifted forward into the first and
second molar position with a little bit of angulation on the opposite
side. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth through the second
molars. She has a real constricted maxilla. She has full Class II cuspid
molar relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 2 to 3 mm.
Deb's bite has changed fairly significant since her injury. Her lower
teeth used to bite up into the roof of her mouth where she would have
indentations in the gums right behind the upper teeth. She does not have
relationship anymore so her lower jaws likely moved backwards and
perhaps and little bit further downwards in the front. Maximal incisal
opening is about 34 mm. She can open 26 mm with reasonable comfort.
Excursion movement to right 1 mm, to the left 3 mm. To palpation, she
has some mild tenderness to the styloid areas and right TMJ. No other
pain to palpation in the head and neck and area. On opening, joints seem
to function reasonably smoothly, but with significant limitation of
mobility. As Deb opens, she felt she had some slight clicking in the
right joint, but is different than the popping that she used to have
prior.

Before Deb's accident, she had no clicking or popping in her jaw joints.
They only developed after the accident and now the loud popping has
essentially gone away. The popping that she used to have was only on the
right side. Deb is not aware of having any significant difficulties
breathing through her nose. She does have snoring. She sometimes is
tired during the day. She is not aware of having any sleep apnea type of
problems. Intranasally, turbinates are large sized, but not too
significant. Nostrils are quite constricted. The <PERSON> is wide and
contributes to the narrowness of the nostrils. Using the nasal scope and
pulling the nostrils open significantly improved her ability to breathe
through her nose.


Panorex shows an absence of mandibular first molars and mesial drifting
of the second and third molars. There is more significant mesial tipping
of the left second and third molars as compared to the right side.
Missing maxillary third molars. Difficult to evaluate sinuses on this
view. Nasal airway appears it may be adequate.

Right TMJ condyle shows some anterior beaking present.

Left mandibular condyle shows evidence of previous subcondylar fracture
with the head of the condyle rotated anterior and forward underneath the
articular eminence.

Right TMJ tomogram shows condyle appears arthritic. There is extreme
loss of dimensions superiorly and posteriorly. Articular eminence is
fairly steep. On the opening view, there is virtually no evidence of
translation.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a subcondylar tangential fracture with the
condyle sitting almost overtop of the sigmoid notch and the condyle is
completely anterior to the articular eminence. Articular eminence is
moderately steep. There appears to be some remaining transection of the
oblique fracture through the condylar neck area that does extend up
towards the joint that falls far short. On opening, there is no
significant evidence of translation.

DEBORAH NORGARD 2/16/05 Page 3

Waters view shows the sinuses appear clear. <PERSON> in the left
nostril appears a little bit enlarged as does the right side. There
appears to be some airway on the right side, more so than the left side.

Cephalometrically, she has a severe skeletal Class II relationship.
There is some vertical maxillary deficiency, but not too significant,
perhaps some slight AP maxillary deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway is
moderately constricted with an AP dimension of about 6 to 6.5 mm at the
base of the tongue and 5 mm at the base of the soft palate.


1.  Left TMJ subcondylar fracture with nonunion and a condyle positioned
    anterior and inferior to the articular eminence.

2.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
    and with adhesions creating a closed lock.

3.  Severe AP mandibular deficiency.

4.  Severe transverse maxillary deficiency.

5.  Slight vertical maxillary deficiency.

6.  Slight AP maxillary deficiency.

7.  Class II occlusion.

8.  Mild crowding of lower anterior arch.

9.  Mild crowding of upper anterior arch.

10. Headaches.

11. TMJ pain.

12. Mastoid dysfunction.

13. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

14. Snoring.

15. Narrow nostrils.

16. Wide Columella.

17. Anterior nasal airway obstruction.

18. Significant mesial tipping of mandibular left second and third
    molars.

19. Missing mandibular first molars bilaterally with the second and
    third molars drifted forward into the first and second molar
    position.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

    c.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm
        of tooth structure to account for probable tooth size
        discrepancy and to keep from flairing the lower incisors any
        further forward. Upright roots on the first and second molars
        bilaterally.

DEBORAH NORGARD 2/16/05 Page 4

2.  Surgery.


<PERSON> reconstruction of mandibular advancement with TMJ
    Concepts total joint prostheses.

b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from abdomen.)

c.  Bilateral condylectomies.

d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand it, advance slightly and
    downgraft.

e.  Reconstruction of the columella to increase nostril size.

  Option 2: Surgery Stage I

a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the maxilla, advance it
    slightly and

  downgraft it.

b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.

c.  Reconstruction of the columella.

  Surgery Stage II (if TMJs get worse.)

a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with total joint prostheses.

b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

Option 3 Surgery Stage I.

a. Reconstruct left condyle but uprighting the condyle repositioning the
condyle and

disc into the fossa.

b. Right TMJ articular disc reposition and ligament repair with Mitek
anchor.

  Surgery Stage II.

a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies.

b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.

c.  Reconstruction of the columella.

3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
