LIA OBERSTAR 09-17-03

Lia was referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 5500 <PERSON>, Ste. 360,
Dallas, <PERSON>.

Patient History

She had an episode of pneumonia when she was much younger but then had a
bout of bronchitis about five years ago and then another bout of
pneumonia about three years ago. She has osteochondritis dissecans in
her right knee and has had two surgeries on that.

Lia is currently takes no medications and has no allergies.

Lia gets headaches about one time a week in the frontal area and might
drift a little bit over into the temporal area. No TMJ pain. She gets
earaches but relates that to swimmer’s ear and usually gets that when
she switches swimming pools. She gets occasional tinnitus but no
problems with vertigo and no hearing loss. No other joints bother her
except she does have significant problems with tendinitis and other
tendon problems affecting some of her joints due to her swimming. She is
not aware of clenching and bruxing at night and, in fact, tends to sleep
with her mouth open. Her mother and her grandmother have some
significant headache problems.

Patient Concerns

1.  <PERSON> is retruded and less visual

2.  When she smiles, she shows a lot of her gums

3.  Her teeth don’t fit together

4.  The upper teeth appear too far forward

5.  Difficulties getting her lips together

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 7 on the right side and 6 on the left side. Left commissure is
down probably 2 to 3 mm compared to the right side. Maxillary dental
midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline. Mandibular
dental midline is about 1 mm to the right. Mandibular dental midline and
chin are pretty much aligned to each other.

In profile view, the lip is a little bit AP deficient right at the point
B level by maybe 2 to 3 mm. Upper lip supralabrale might be forward just
a millimeter or 2. In profile view, <PERSON> appears retruded about 15 mm.
With the lips relaxed, lip incompetence is about 13 mm. Lower third face
appears somewhat elongated compared to the middle third. Chin-neckline
is not well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has good attached
gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all
of her teeth back through the second molars present. Some mild crowding
in the upper anterior arch. She has a Class II end-on occlusion
bilaterally being at least 5 to 6 mm Class II. She has an overjet
relationship of about 8 mm. She has about a 0 to 1 vertical overbite
relationship.

Intranasally, she has an enlarged turbinate on the left side and a bone
spur on that side. On the right side, the turbinate appears relatively
normal in size. Appears that she may have some obstruction on the left
side. She can breathe easier through the right side than the left side.
<PERSON> appears clear and healthy.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. The rest of the
teeth are all present, and there appears to be good bone support to
them. Sinuses appear clear. <PERSON> appear relatively normal. Difficult
to tell the morphology of the turbinates on this x-ray.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking on it. It
appears that there is a pseudocyst on the condylar head. May be a
decreased joint space in some area. Articular eminence is moderately
steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also has some anterior beaking.
Appears there may be a pseudocyst on the condyle. Decreased superior and
posterior joint space. It looks like there almost might be a small
calcification in the posterior aspect of the joint space. Articular
eminence is moderately steep.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles. Anterior
beaking is much more obvious, particularly on the right side. On the
open views, the joint space seems a little bit decreased on the left
side.

Waters view shows that the left turbinate is larger than the right
turbinate. Sinuses appear reasonably clear, although the x-ray may be
just slightly overrotated and difficult to determine. Frontal sinuses
are quite large, but frontal and ethmoid sinuses appear clear.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph demonstrates vertical maxillary excess
and significant AP mandibular deficiency with perhaps some slight
asymmetry. Oropharyngeal airway appears quite constricted at the base of
the soft palate where it measures about 4.5 mm, and at the base of the
tongue in some areas it may be only a couple of millimeters wide.
Turbinates appear to extend just slightly beyond the hard palate.

Tooth-size analysis reveals no <PERSON>’s discrepancy. Hand articulating
the models shows that Lia has good transverse width of the occlusions
that she can be put into fairly close Class I cuspid-molar relationship
with no transverse discrepancies. Still has about a 2-mm anterior
overjet, but this may be due to the mild crowding in the lower anterior
arch and some malrotations in the maxillary cuspid area. Lia does have
about a 0.5-mm tooth-size discrepancy in the bicuspid areas involving
all of the teeth with the lowers being larger than the uppers.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Vertical maxillary hyperplasia

2.  AP maxillary hyperplasia

3.  AP mandibular hypoplasia

4.  AP microgenia

5.  Class II occlusion

6.  Anterior open bite tendency

7.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and possible articular disc dislocations

8.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an airway measurement
    of 4 mm or less

9.  Overangulation of the maxillary incisors

10. Overangulation of the mandibular incisors

11. Anterior mandibular vertical hyperplasia

12. Hypertrophied turbinates

13. Partial nasal airway obstruction

14. Headaches

Recommended Treatment

1.  MRI of left and right TMJ

2.  Extractions

  Extract maxillary and mandibular first bicuspids

3.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch closing the extraction space

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch closing the extraction space

4.  Surgery

    A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible

    C.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors if discs are displaced and still salvageable
        (will depend on MRI evaluation)

    D.  Bilateral partial turbinectomies

    E.  Bony augmentation genioplasty

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
