<PERSON> is 16 years old. Birthday is 04/14/88. He was referred by Dr.
<PERSON>, 2845 Parkwood Blvd., #100, Plano, TX.

Patient History

Alan is in good health with no major medical problems. <PERSON> initially
had a crossbite apparently in the front. At the age of 7 and then again
at 13, he was corrected with a facemask set up to pull the upper jaw
forward and push the lower jaw backwards. Each time he wore the facemask
for about six months. The treatment was provided to him by Dr. <PERSON>. It
wasn’t until about three years ago that he became aware that he had a
jaw problem when he went to see Dr. <PERSON>, a dentist. Dr. <PERSON> identified
that there was a TMJ problem as well as a jaw alignment problem and
referred <PERSON> to Dr. <PERSON>. <PERSON> has been told by Dr. <PERSON> that he could
start developing problems on the left side as well because it has to
work so much harder because the right side is not working so well. He
has no earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The only other
joint area that bothers him is his lower back at times. He took allergy
shots for 18 months when he was younger but is not aware of any
specifically identified allergy that he has. He has a depression on the
right side of his face and in the masseter muscle area. He is not aware
of any clenching or bruxism. He has no significant problems with
headaches. He rates his TMJ pain and discomfort at a level of 2. On an
average day his pain and headache level is at 1. He rates his jaw
function at 3, diet at 0, and disability at 0. <PERSON> is a mouth breather
particularly at night when sleeping. He is not aware of problems with
snoring. He doesn’t have any problems with sleep apnea. He is tired
during the day, but he says for other reasons than breathing problems.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has some decreased fullness in the right side of
the face probably about 10 to 15 anterior to the tragus of the ear and
extends forward about 30 mm. Vertical length is roughly 60 mm. Upper lip
length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 2 mm.
Maxillary and mandibular midlines are pretty much on the facial midline
as is the chin. Deficiency in the right mandibular ramus area gives the
impression of asymmetry, but the midlines look pretty much on.

In profile view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial balance. Could have some AP
deficiency of the mandible of perhaps maybe 6 to 8 mm. AP position of
the maxilla actually looks fairly good. Chin-neckline is a little bit
short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second
molars. There is a little bit of crowding, lower anterior arch. Has a
high attached labial frenulum between the central incisors that comes up
right in between the teeth. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth
back through the second molars. He has a really severe curve of Spee in
the upper arch. Is fairly close to being a Class I cuspid relationship
bilaterally. He has an anterior open bite of about 2 to 3 mm.
Transversely, the mandibular occlusal plane is fairly flat. Maxillary
right cuspid is about 2 mm higher than the left cuspid. Tends to have a
posterior crossbite tendency but the right side is a little bit worse
than the left side. <PERSON> appears clear. Uvula is mildly enlarged.
Soft palate is a little bit elongated. Faucial pillars appear moderately
constricted.

Holding his nostrils open did improve his abilities to breathe through
his nose with better improvement on the right side as compared to the
left side. The turbinates appear to be moderately enlarged, although it
was difficult to see them because they begin a little bit further
posteriorly than usual. Base of the columella is somewhat side, and the
nostrils are a little bit constricted as are the luminal valves.

He does have an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and an
increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch. On a flat plane, the
incisors are probably 2 mm up off the horizontal plane, and the second
molars are up probably about 3 mm off the horizontal plane. The lower
arch has an accentuated curve of occlusion as well. Maxillary arch is
probably a good 6 to 7 mm transverse deficient. On opening, the mandible
deviates to the right side probably a good 8 mm.

On opening, joints seem to function smoothly, but he does have
significant deviation off to the right side probably a good 8 mm. He was
unable to pop and reduce his discs at this time. To palpation, he had
just some very mild tenderness over the TMJs with the left side being a
little bit more tender than the right side but otherwise no significant
pain to palpation situation. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm but that
is with extreme deviation of the mandible off to the right side of 8 mm.
Excursive movements to the right side are 7 mm and to the left around 3
mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all four third molars developing and
unerupted. Sinuses look relatively clear. <PERSON> on the left side
looks a little bit enlarged. Vertical height of the mandible on the left
side appears a little bit longer than the right side. <PERSON> on the right
side is a little bit more narrow than on the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa.
Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Suspect the patient is
developing a dislocated disc on this side. Has significantly increased
anterior joint space.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small anteroposteriorly and
significantly posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Appears there may be
increased communication between the middle ear and the faucial pillar.
Articular eminence is fairly steep and a little bit steeper than the
opposite side.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the left joint with the
condyle coming out over and slightly beyond the articular eminence. On
the left side, the condyle stops on the posterior aspect of the
articular eminence.

Waters view shows that the internal nose is fairly wide in dimension.
Turbinates appear somewhat enlarged and may be causing some significant
airway obstruction. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Cephalometrically, he has some adenoid tissue remaining in his
nasopharynx area that is in close approximation to the turbinates.
Oropharyngeal airway looks good. <PERSON> appears somewhat AP deficient
as does the mandible a little bit. He has an anterior open bite and
appears to have just a slight Class III molar relationship. Accentuated
curve of occlusion can be seen in both arches.

Tooth-size analysis reveals that there is no really significant
tooth-size problem.

Facial nerve appears to be intact for all functions.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
    and closed lock

2.  AP maxillary deficiency

3.  Transverse maxillary deficiency

4.  Slight AP mandibular deficiency

5.  <PERSON> (3 mm)

6.  Occludes only on the left bicuspids, molars, and right side molars

7.  Bilateral posterior crossbites being worse on the right side than
    the left side

8.  TMJ discomfort

9.  Difficulties eating and chewing

10. Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch

11. Accentuated curve of Wilson, upper arch

12. Slightly increased curve of Wilson, lower arch

13. Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics


  Section 1: Left cuspid through first molar

  Section 2: Left lateral incisor through right lateral incisor

  Section 3: Right cuspid through right first molar

  Place brackets on the second molars but do not engage the second
  molars in the arch wire at this time. Tip lateral incisor roots
  mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
  osteotomies. Place a step in the arch wire between the cuspids and
  lateral incisors to align the four incisors at an elevated plane level
  compared to the cuspids and posterior teeth. Extrude maxillary cuspids
  approximately 2 mm to get them level with the rest of the posterior
  teeth

B.  Align and level mandibular arch

2.  Surgery

    A.  Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
        Mitek anchor

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand, advance, and level the
        occlusal plane and curve of <PERSON> mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        and align it with the maxilla

    D.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
