<PERSON> 12/12/2006

<PERSON> is 53 years old and is referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 5323 Brainerd
Rd., Ste 106, Chattanooga, TN, 37411. Her primary concerns are pain
affecting the TMJs, jaws, ears and head and headaches.


1.  <PERSON> 5/40 mg.

2.  Zoloft 100 mg daily.

3.  Levothyroxine 75 mcg daily.

4.  Crestor 10 mg daily.

5.  Carisoprodol (Som) p.r.n.

<PERSON>'s problems began at the age of 14 in about 1995 or 1996. She had
sinus surgery around 1995 or 1996 and was put to sleep for that surgery.
It was shortly after that when she became aware of having TMJ problems.
Additional surgeries she had included her gallbladder around 1980 and
then in March of 2006, she had a uterus and gallbladder suspension
procedure performed.

Her right joint has always been worse than the left side until very
recently where the left side now hurts more than the right side.
Previous treatments include treatment by Dr. <PERSON> who used splints
beginning in about 1995 or 1996. She has been wearing splints for 11
years. Dr. <PERSON> also put her on exercises. She was not doing well but
unfortunately in October of 2005, she fell off a ladder while painting
and broke a bone in her right leg, injured her right ankle, bruised up
her right side and hit the back of her head. Following that incident,
her TMJ problems got worse. She did begin seeing Dr. <PERSON> approximately
3 months ago. He made new splints for her. He also placed her in
physical therapy. The physical therapy has been ineffective for her. Dr.
<PERSON> used four or five different modalities of treatment for her. This

1.  Splint therapy.

2.  Myo-Monitor treatment.

3.  Laser treatment.

4.  Injections.

5.  Cranial manipulation.

None of these treatments have improved <PERSON>'s situation.

She currently gets severe earaches bilaterally and gets vertigo but no
tinnitus but she does have some loss of hearing. She does have problems
with depression that she relates to the jaw problems. She is very much
aware of clenching and bruxing at night and during the day. She really
does not have any other joint problems. She has been told that she has
some arthritis at C6-7. One of her knees occasionally would give her a
little bit of trouble but not too significantly.

<PERSON> 12/12/2006 Page 2

She rates her headaches at a level of 7 that occur in the frontal,
temple and posterior head area. She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average
daily pain at 9, jaw function, diet and disability at 9. She is not
aware of any numbness and cranial nerve 7 appears to be intact. <PERSON>
does feed wild birds almost only on a daily basis but she has never been
around domesticated birds.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good facial symmetry in middle and upper
third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip
relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the
facial midline as is mandibular dental midline. <PERSON> is deviated off
towards the side probably about 3 to 4 mm. In profile view, <PERSON> has
some AP maxillary deficiency of about 3 mm or so. <PERSON> appears quite
retruded and chin-neckline is extremely short. Chin-neck angle is not
well defined. <PERSON> may be retruded approximately 12 to 15 mm.
Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. She has crowding in the lower anterior arch of probably about 4
or 5 mm. In the upper arch she has all of her teeth back through the
second molars. She has some moderate crowding in the upper anterior arch
of probably about 4 mm. Transverse narrowness in the upper arch in the
bicuspid area. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the
right side of probably 2 to 3 mm, left side probably about 4 mm. She has
essentially a crossbite in the bicuspid area bilaterally. She has an
open bite from the left central incisor to the second bicuspid. She has
a transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the right side being about
2 or 3 mm higher than the left side. Vertical overbite is about 0 on the
right side and 1 to 2 mm on the left side. Intraorally, the soft tissues
look healthy in the oropharyngeal area. The uvula may be a little bit
enlarged. The soft palate looks relatively normal as does the faucial
pillars. Intranasally, the turbinates are mild to moderately enlarged
but she does not appear to have any significant airway obstruction that
she is aware. She does have some moderate snoring. She has moderate
daytime somnolence sometimes worse depending on how well she sleeps at
night. She is not aware of having sleep apnea syndrome. She does not
sleep well at night. She does have a sleep disorder that may be related
at least in part to the pain factors. She says that sometimes when she
takes the Soma that she can with some time go back to sleep. To
palpation, she has high moderate to low severe pain over the TMJs,
styloid areas, high moderate pain over the temporalis, masseters and
mild pain over the medial pterygoids and right shoulder. Joints seem to
function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 35 mm, 22
mm without discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is about 10 mm,
left about 8. <PERSON> relates that her TMJ pain and headaches are pretty
much continuous with no predisposition to time of day. It has been this
way for about the last 7 to 8 months.


Panorex shows the presence of impacted mandibular third molars.
Maxillary third molars are missing but all other teeth are present. She
has crowns on the mandibular left first and second molar, maxillary left
first molar and right first molar. Sinuses appear relatively clear.
Nasal airway appears adequate. The left condyle appears relatively
normal architecturally with just some slight anterior beaking. The right
condyle appears significantly diminutive in size and it appears to have
lost at least half of its volume.

<PERSON> 12/12/2006 Page 3

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. The bony septum appears
relatively straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size but there
appears to be adequate airway. Significant facial asymmetry is evident
with the left inferior border being probably about 5 to 6 mm lower than
the right side. <PERSON> seems to be deviated off towards the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows diminutive condyle that is quite small
anteroposteriorly and it appears to have lost vertical dimension as
well. Articular eminence is relatively shallow. There appears to be
decreased joint space. On opening, there is moderate translation.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little flattened on top and
a little bit of sclerosis present. Increased anterior joint space and
decreased posterior and posterosuperior joint space. This is compatible
with anteriorly displaced disc. On opening, the left condyle has
moderately good translation.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the mandible appears
retruded anteroposteriorly. There is significant discrepancy in the
vertical heights at the angle of the mandible with a vertical difference
of almost 10 mm of the right angle compared to the left angle. At the
occlusal plane level there is about a 4 to 5 mm vertical difference in
the second molar area and probably about 3 mm in the cuspid area.
Surprisingly the oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good with airway
dimension of about 8 mm at the base of the tongue and about 9 mm at the
soft palate level. However, she does have a high occlusal plane angle
and the mandible does appear to be retruded. Tooth size analysis shows
that there is a <PERSON>'s difference of about 4 mm plus. Also a
significant tooth size discrepancy in the second bicuspid area with the
upper second bicuspids being about ½ mm to 1 mm smaller than the
mandibular second bicuspids.


1.  Right TMJ reactive arthritis with significant bone resorption with
    loss of vertical height as well as AP and mediolateral dimension, as
    well as a displaced articular disc with significant degenerative
    changes.

2.  Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with reduction.

3.  Left maxillary vertical hypoplasia.

4.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

5.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

6.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

7.  Class II end-on occlusion with the left side being worse than the
    right side.

8.  Anterior open bite.

9.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm
    higher than the left side.

10. Crowing in lower anterior arch.

11. Crowding in upper anterior arch.

12. Significant tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of
    4+ mm.

13. Bilateral crossbite tendencies in the bicuspid areas.

14. AP microgenia.

<PERSON> 12/12/2006 Page 4

15. Severe headaches.

16. Severe TMJ pain.

17. Myofascial pain.

18. Snoring.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
        osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing at least 3 mm of tooth structure from the
        anterior 6 teeth. Slenderize the lower bicuspids as well and try
        to maximize posterior anchorage to try and minimize forward
        tipping of the lower incisors.

    c.  Expand both arches in the bicuspid area.

2.  CT (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement as well
        as transverse leveling with bilateral TMJ Concepts total joint
        prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and
        downgraft it posteriorly and expand.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ coronoidectomies.

    d.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    e.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the
        mandible.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
