<PERSON> PRIOR 07-31-02

<PERSON> is 37 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

Patient History

She has had a previous ovarian cyst that was removed in the year 2000.
She has had a tonsillectomy, and she has had two C-sections. She also
has been diagnosed as having mitral valve prolapse.

Current Medications

She takes Sarafem 14 days a month.

Patient Concerns


1.  She has a crossbite on the right side.

2.  She has facial asymmetry.

3.  She has clicking and popping in the right jaw joint.

4.  History of headaches that seem to be prompted when she is under more
    stress.

5.  Pain in the right jaw joint.

6.  Occasional ringing in the ears.

She has no problems with earaches or with vertigo except occasionally
when she gets up fast.

etiology. She does have a history of nocturnal clenching and bruxism.
Other joints that bother her include her neck, back, shoulders, and left
knee.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper
third face. Some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip length is
20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 mm on the left, 3 mm
on the right. Maxillary dental midline is about a millimeter off to the
right. Mandibular dental midline is probably 2 to 3 mm off to the right.
<PERSON> is 5 to 6 mm off to the right. Inferior border of the mandible on
the right side is probably about 4 to 5 mm higher than the left side. A
little more fullness in the mandible angle on the left side than the
right side by probably about 4 to 5 mm.

In profile view, <PERSON> may have a little bit of AP maxillary deficiency,
probably a couple of millimeters. Mandible may be retruded maybe about 5
or 6 mm. Chin-neckline appears a little bit shortened. Chin-neck angle
is not well-defined.

Intraorally, in the lower arch on the left side, she is missing the
first and third molars, and on the left side, she may be missing the
first molar with the second and third molar drifted forward. Right
cuspid is partially blocked out of the arch. Cuspids are fairly
symmetric anteroposteriorly with the left one maybe being a millimeter
posterior to the right one. In the upper arch, she is missing the right
first and third molars, and on the left side, she is missing probably
the third molar. She has a lot of veneer facings on the anterior teeth,
and she states that these were put on to help mask some of the
malrotations on her teeth, and, therefore, are quite thick. Intraorally,
the oropharynx appears clear. She has a very small fibroma that may be a
millimeter in diameter on the left faucial pillar of probably no
consequence. She does have a Class I cuspid-molar relationship
essentially bilaterally. She has an anterior deep-bite of probably about
5 mm. She has a crossbite on the right side extending from the first
bicuspid on posteriorly.

To palpation, she has some moderate discomfort over the right temporalis
muscle and right TMJ. On jaw function, left joint seems to function
relatively smoothly; however, right joint does have some crepitation.
Incisal opening is 55 mm, excursive movement to the right 8 mm and to
the left 9 mm. In looking at the dentition, there is a posterior yaw
with the maxilla being at least 2 mm off towards the left side, and the
mandible also is a little bit off to the left side.

Nasally, she has constricted nostrils and wide columella base. Nasal
septum appears to be deviated somewhat off to the left side, and she
does have a nasal spur sticking off the left side, which may cause some
airway blockage. She claims no difficulties breathing through her nose.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows in the upper arch she is missing the left third molar,
right third molar, and first molar. She has a root canal on the
maxillary right second molar and second bicuspid. She has a crown on the
maxillary right second bicuspid, left first molar. In the lower arch,
she is missing right third molar, left first and third molar. Sinuses
look clear. A big spur coming out the septum towards the left side.
Turbinates appear large, particularly on the left side where it appears
to touch against the septum. Left condyle appears relatively normal.
Right condyle shows evidence of arthritis and resorptive changes
associated with it. Appears that it could be some calcification in the
fossa but could be an overlay of other bony structures.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be somewhat sclerotic
and arthritic. Decreased posterior joint space and superior joint space.
Some anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with more normal morphology. However,
the posterior joint space is also decrease, and there may be slight
decrease in vertical joint space. However, the architecture overall of
the bony structures of the joint including the condyle and articular
eminence appears relatively normal.

Translation is moderately good in both joints.

Waters’ view shows that the bony septum at least is straight, although
there does appear to be problems clinically with the cartilaginous
portion of the septum. Turbinates appear enlarged and appear to block
most of the functional nasal airway. Frontal sinuses are quite large.

Cephalometrically, she appears symmetric vertically, although that is
not what we see clinically. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat decreased
with the distance at the base of the tongue being less than 5 mm. In the
soft palate, the airway dimension is approximately 7 mm. With the
lateral cephalometric x-ray, <PERSON>’s head is tipped upwards and forwards
some, and this may actually open up the airway more than what it would
be in a more normal head position.

<PERSON> was not aware of having any facial asymmetry until it was brought
to her attention when she was about 20 years old when she had her wisdom
teeth out. <PERSON> does have some problems with snoring. She also is tired
a lot during the day.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Right TMJ severe <PERSON> arthritis and articular dislocation with
    severe deformation and non-reducing.

2.  Left TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with significant
    deformation and non-reducing.

3.  Maxillary hypoplasia and significant asymmetry.

4.  Mandibular hypoplasia and significant asymmetry.

5.  Mild crowding, lower anterior arch.

6.  Significant cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the right
    side being about 2 to 3 mm higher than the left side.

7.  Right posterior maxillary crossbite.

8.  Missing mandibular left first molar, maxillary right first molar,
    and all four third molars.

9.  Deviated nasal septum with large nasal spur off to the left side.

10. Hypertrophied turbinates.

11. Significant nasal airway obstruction.

12. Significant constricture of external nares.

13. Wide columella base.

14. TMJ pain.

15. Headaches.

16. Myofascial pain.

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. May need to strip lower
        anterior teeth to keep from flaring the lower incisors too far
        forward.

2.  Surgery

    A.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with condylectomies,
        meniscectomies, debridement and reconstruction with mandibular
        advancement and correction of asymmetry using TMJ Concepts total
        joint prostheses.

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand the arch and level is
        transversely.

    C.  Turbinectomies.

    D.  Nasal septoplasty.

    E.  Reconstruction of columella.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
