<PERSON> 04-19-04

<PERSON> is 52 years old and referred by <PERSON>, DDS, MSD, 101 N.
Westlake Blvd., Ste. 202, Westlake Village, CA 91362.

Patient History

She has had carpal tunnel problems in her hands. She takes vitamins and
no other medications. When was 13, she had a traumatic injury to her
knee where she fractured her kneecap and cut some of the ligaments. She
had surgery for that to repair it, and she really doesn’t have any
significant problems with it now. She does have scoliosis. She has one
spot in her back that is extremely tender as a result of the scoliosis.
She does have some back symptoms, but she takes good care of it, and it
doesn’t cause her too much of a problem. <PERSON>’s problems began around
the age of 32 years old. <PERSON> believes that the onset may have been
caused by the stress of being a divorced single parent and all those
responsibilities. She had previous orthodontics from age 20 to 32 that
included extraction of two maxillary teeth. She has had acupuncture
where she received it two times a week for two months with no
improvement. She has been on detoxant herbs without improvement. She was
placed on St. John’s Wart high doses for six months with no improvement.
She has had chiropractic treatment without improvement.

She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, but does get some vertigo.
Other joints that bother her include her neck, upper back, hands,
particularly the left, and fingers. She does have scoliosis, and she has
carpal tunnel on the right hand. She does have redness around the joints
in her fingers. She is aware of nighttime clenching and also during the
day. Her snoring is quite significant. She was told that she needed a
CPAP machine. She apparently has been told that she snores extremely
loudly like a man, a football player. <PERSON> does get daily headaches in
the frontal area, behind her eyes, and in the temporal areas that
average about a level of 3. They used to go away by mid afternoon. She
gets daily TMJ pain at a level of 5, overall daily pains at 5, jaw
function at 6, diet at 3, and disability at 5.

Patient Concerns

1.  Headaches

2.  TMJ pain

3.  Wakes up exhausted

4.  Severe snoring

5.  Wakes up during the night

6.  Wakes up gasping for air

7.  Face feels frozen in the mornings when she wakes up

8.  On opening in the mornings, she has a lot of cracking and
    significant noise in her joints

9.  Jaws lock up

10. Daytime somnolence

Current Medications

The only medications she currently takes is vitamins.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
<PERSON> on the right side might be a little bit larger than the left
side. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship
is about -2. Maxillary, mandibular, and <PERSON> are all pretty
much on the facial midline.

In profile view, <PERSON> might have some slight AP maxillary deficiency of
maybe about 2 or 3 mm. <PERSON> is retruded by about 12 mm. Chin-neckline is
very short, and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. As <PERSON> postures
her mandible forward about 10 mm, it significantly improves her overall
facial profile and balance and actually creates a good chin-neckline.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars present. Lower teeth appear to be slightly overangulated. The
lingual labial thickness of the lower incisors appears slightly _______.
In the upper arch, she is missing her first bicuspids and does have her
cuspids in place. A little bit of a diasthema between the central
incisors. She is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has
about a millimeter of overbite. She has a Class I cuspid, Class II molar
occlusal relationship. <PERSON> has had her tonsils removed. Interestingly,
on the right side, she has a scar band that tethers the right posterior
faucial pillar back toward the posterior pharyngeal wall, decreasing the
airway a little bit more than on the opposite side. Otherwise,
oropharyngeal tissues look fairly good.

Intranasally, the turbinates are fairly large. They appear to be
creating some blockage of the airway. Right side seems to have more
blockage than the left side. Luminal valves are constricted bilaterally.
By holding the luminal valves open, <PERSON> could breathe easier through
her nose with significant improvement. <PERSON> feels like she is always
holding her head up, and she is not sure exactly why, but if she is
sitting for a while or in a meeting, she feels that she is using her
hands to hold her head up higher. She says her head begins to feel
heavy.

She has no known allergies. She has a lot of problems with jewelry and
can only wear gold jewelry. Cheap earrings cause her ears to swell and
breakout. Likewise, cheap metal watch bands for instance will cause her
arm to become discolored.

To palpation, she has some mild to moderate tenderness over the SCMs and
also over the TMJs. Maximal incisal opening is 52 mm. She could open to
about 40 mm without too much pain and discomfort at this moment. She can
move 11 mm in each direction. However, there are times when she gets
locked up where she can’t open and can’t eat.

On opening, she has significant audible popping in both joints with the
left side being louder than the right side. Opening click on the left
side occurs somewhere between 35 and 40 mm of opening with a closing
click at probably about 15. On the right side, the click is a little bit
softer and occurs after the left at probably about 40 to 45 mm of
opening with a closing click at about 15. When <PERSON> clenches, she gets
significantly more activity in the right masseter muscle and temporal
muscle than she does on the left side. She does have hypertrophy of the
right masseter muscle and temporalis muscle greater than on the left
side.

Radiographic Evaluation

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good form
with some sclerosis on the head of it. It is posteriorly positioned in
the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Perhaps a slight
decreased posterior and posterosuperior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have some anterior
beaking. Appears to be a little bit more arthritic. A little hard to see
the cortical bone in these views. Articular eminence is moderately
shallow. Maybe a slightly decreased joint space posteriorly and
superiorly in one of the views.

Open view shows good translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows she holds her head tipped up
some. Oropharyngeal airway at least in the soft palate area appears
decreased to about 3 mm. At the base of the tongue, the airway is closer
to 7 to 8 mm.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are fairly clear. Turbinates are
moderately large. Clear airway is not really identifiable. Not much of a
right frontal sinus but a large left frontal sinus. Midlines appear
fairly well-aligned.

Panorex radiograph shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Nasal
airway actually appears fairly good. She is missing upper first
bicuspids. However, it could be cuspids and will determine that when we
do our clinical exam. Is missing all four third molars. <PERSON> appear
on these views to be okay. No other pathology noted.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  AP maxillary deficiency

2.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

3.  AP mandibular deficiency

4.  High occlusal plane angulation of 16 degrees (normal 8 degrees)

5.  Missing maxillary first bicuspids

6.  Hypertrophied masseter muscles with the right larger than the left

7.  Hypertrophied temporal muscles with the right larger than the left

8.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway with 3 mm at the soft palate level
    (normal 11 mm)

9.  Hypertrophied turbinates

10. Constricture of the nasal luminal valves

11. Nasal airway obstruction

12. External nasal deformity

13. Sleep apnea syndrome

14. Severe snoring

15. Daytime somnolence

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anteriors to
        decrease the slight overangulation and to help us provide a
        better anterior fit particularly following the closure of the
        maxillary diasthema between the central incisors

2.  Possibly repeat the sleep study

3.  Consider Botox injections to masseter muscles and temporalis muscles
    with greater injections on the right side as compared to the left
    side to try to decrease the hyperfunction and hypertrophy of these
    muscles

4.  Surgery

    A.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction and decrease the occlusal plane
        angulation

    C.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and
        downgraft it posteriorly

    D.  Partial inferior turbinectomies

    E.  Reconstruct nasal luminal valves

    F.  External rhinoplasty

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

Review of static films agrees with our previous interpretation. In the
coronal views, in both joints she has arthritis, and both discs appear
to be anteriorly and laterally displaced.

MRI

Left TMJ, sagittal view, shows significant erosions on the head of the
condyle. Osteophytic projection out anterior to the condyle toward the
lateral aspect of the joint. More medially, the condyle has a little bit
better shape, and anterior beaking is present there. Articular eminence
is moderately steep. There appears to be decreased anterior joint space
particularly out laterally and decreased vertical joint space as well as
posterior joint space. Not much disc is seen medially. Appears to be
more evidence of disc out laterally compatible with lateral displacement
to the articular disc. On the T2 films, there is really no inflammation
in the joint and no fluid in the joint spaces. Arthritic changes on the
condylar head are quite apparent. <PERSON> tissue is much more evident out
laterally than it is in the medial aspect of the joint.

On opening, there is fairly good translation of the condyle, and the
disc appears to be reduced in the open view.

Right TMJ, sagittal view, shows a condyle with arthritis changes but not
quite as severe as the opposite side. Out laterally there appears to be
a lot of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. Decreased posterior and
superior joint spaces are present. Articular eminence is moderately
steep. The disc is quite evident at the most lateral aspect of the
condyle and best seen in that position. More medially there is no
evidence of disc tissue. Out laterally, the disc is anteriorly
displaced. These findings could be compatible with lateral displacement
of the articular disc.

On opening, there is not quite as good translation on this side as the
opposite side. It appears that the disc may reduce. A little bit of
fluid in the superior joint space.


1.  Left TMJ significant arthritis with articular disc anterolaterally
    displaced but reducing on opening

2.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc anteriorly and medially
    displaced with reduction on opening
