TANDI REHEIS 03/06/2006

Tandi is 27 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 2500 <PERSON>
St., Suite 131, <PERSON>, OK 73072. Tandi's problems began when she was
about 10 years old when she had some clicking and popping in her joints
1989, she first saw Dr. <PERSON> who fitted her with upper and
lower flat plane splints. This made a significance difference for her
and she was symptom free for awhile. She had a bionater for awhile but
this did not really help her. However, her clicking, popping and
frequent bilateral headaches have continued. In 1993, her problems were
getting worse and Dr. <PERSON> recommended orthodontics. She wore braces
for 18 months but saw no difference in her bite or jaw pain. She went
back to Dr. <PERSON> and had infrared treatment and some other treatment
modalities. In May of 2004 she began medications for the first time
which included <PERSON>. Her dentist, Dr. <PERSON> placed some onlays on
her teeth and this significantly worsened her pain and muscle problems.
Incisal opening was limited to 20 minutes by July of 2004. She saw Dr.
Sparks, a chiropractic specialist. He wanted to do 36 adjustments but
after 2 adjustments her pain got so much worse that she discontinued
following up with him. She underwent a procedure to try and unlock her
closed lock situation by Dr. <PERSON> in January of 2005. Dr. <PERSON>
eventually was able to get <PERSON> up to 30 mm of incisal opening.
However, her pain and headaches continued. She underwent additional
physical therapy in February through May of 2005. In May of 2005 she had
bilateral TMJ arthroscopies performed. Since then she developed grating
sounds in both joints. Popping and clicking started again for her by
July/August of 2005. She continued with splint therapy but has not
improved. She was evaluated in December of 2005 by Dr. <PERSON>
who then referred her here.


1.  TMJ joint pain.

2.  Joint clicking and popping.

3.  Temporal and suboccipital headaches.

4.  Neck and shoulder tension.


1.  Ortho-Evra.

2.  Soma 350 mg b.i.d.

3.  Hydrocodone 5/500 q.h.s.

4.  Fish oil 2 times per day.

5.  Folic acid b.i.d.

She has no problems with earaches, gets occasional tinnitus but no
vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her neck where she has a
disc problem. Her hips occasionally will bother her. She does do some
clenching but it is better controlled with the splints. She may be
clenching some during the day but at night she may likely do it if she
does wake up with headaches.

She has almost constant headaches that occur in her frontal, temporal
and posterior head area at about a level of 7. She rates her TMJ pain at
8, overall average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 8, diet at 8,
disability at 7. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left to right
facial symmetry.

TANDI REHEIS 03/06/2006 Page 2

Perhaps light increased fullness in the left angle area may be due to
perhaps a little bit of masseteric hyperplasia. Upper lip length is
about 28 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm. Maxillary,
mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial
midlines. In profile view, she has very nice facial balance vertically
and anteroposteriorly. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth
back through the second molars in both upper and lower arches. She has
basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship. She has about a 3 mm
vertical overbite relationship. When <PERSON> bites down in her maximum
occlusion she does not feel that her posterior teeth touch at all. She
says that her teeth have not fit together since the splint therapy began
in 2004. Intraorally, the uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all
look relatively normal. The nasal structures look normal. No history of
snoring or sleep apnea and no significant daytime somnolence. <PERSON> has
loud audible popping in her joints around 15 to 20 mm and closing
probably around 10 mm. The right side was more obvious than the left
side in the first round of opening and with the second round the same
basic problem occurred. She has some significant crepitation in both
joints. To palpation, Tandi has moderate to high moderate pain around
the temporalis, TMJs, styloid, SCMs, posterior neck and milder pain
around the shoulders and masseters. On opening, she has loud audible
clicks and pops somewhere around 15 to 20 mm of opening and then closing
probably around 10 to 15 mm. There is a crepitus that also accompanies
her jaw function. Maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm and about 35 mm
without significant discomfort. Excursive movements are about 10 mm in
each direction. On excursive movement she has a definite pop that she
produced on the left side but the right side seemed to function
reasonably smoothly.


Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. All the rest of the
teeth are present. The sinuses look reasonably clear. The condyles
appear somewhat arthritic particularly in the left side where there is
some sclerotic bone associated with it. Styloid processes are elongated
bilaterally. The turbinates appear relatively moderate in size. Waters
view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates are moderate in
size. It appears that there is adequate airway. There is some deviation
in the nasal septum but nothing real significant.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of some sclerosis on the head of
the condyle and a decreased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is
moderately steep. A little bit of anterior beaking is present.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears more arthritic and there
is some significant anterior beaking present. Decreased superior and
posterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. In both
sides the occlusion appears to be open in the molar area. On opening
there is actually fairly good translation of both condyles. The
arthritic changes are evident in the open views.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Tandi is essentially a Class
I cuspid molar relationship but has posterior open bites but a good
oropharyngeal airway.

TANDI REHEIS 03/06/2006 Page 3


1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with
    probable adhesions and perforations.

2.  Mandibular hyperplasia.

3.  Bilateral posterior open bites.

4.  TMJ pain.

5.  Headaches.

6.  Myofascial pain.

7.  Significant masticatory dysfunction.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Treatment option #1

    a.  Bilateral TMJ condylectomies and reconstruction with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

3.  Treatment option #2

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies with bone
        screw stabilization.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
