<PERSON> 11-25-02

Patient History

Nancy is a former patient. I previously did surgery on January 13, 1986,

1.  Left TMJ meniscectomy and dermal graft

2.  Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies for
    advancement

3.  <PERSON> augmentation with Proplast implant

She gets some right earache problems, no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing
problems. Other joints that bother her include her right hand and thumb
area, where she has some arthritis, and also she has bursitis in her
hips. In the past, she has had a laminectomy on her back but no problems
with that. She does have some food and environmental allergy problems.
Cheap earrings tend to cause her ears to get infected. She is
predominantly on a soft diet. She is aware of daytime clenching and
possibly nighttime clenching as well. She rates her headaches at a level
of 5 that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas. She
gets her headaches about every three days. She gets pain in the right
TMJ area at about a level of 8, and overall pain on an average day would
be about 8. Jaw function, diet, and disability register at 5.

Current Medications


1.  Estrotest

2.  A cream called C-Peroxicam/Dexamet/Eutetic

3.  Recently completed a Medrol Dosepak

4.  Celebrex occasionally

5.  Advil occasionally

Clinical Evaluation

Nancy has good facial symmetry and balance. She is missing maxillary and
mandibular first bicuspids. Has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship
with about a 4 to 5-mm overbite relationship.

To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck area
including directly over her joints. Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm,
and opening without significant discomfort 37 mm, excursive movement to
the right 3 mm, and to the left 5 mm.

Joints seem to function relatively smoothly at this time.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows evidence of previous surgery with three bone screws in
each ramus area bilaterally and also screws in the chin area. Sinuses
appear clear. <PERSON> on the left side appears large compared to the
right side. <PERSON> both appear a little bit arthritic with the left
one looking worse than the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a good skeletal Class I position
and good position of the chin implant. Oropharyngeal airway appears
slightly decreased.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking. Joint
space appears decreased in vertical height although fairly symmetric
throughout the joint. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears very narrow
anteroposteriorly and significantly posteriorly positioned in the fossa.
Articular eminence is moderately steep. Anterior joint space is
significantly increased. May be some anterior beaking, although the
anteroposterior dimension of the condyle is quite narrow.

On opening, there is restricted translation in both joints with the left
side being slightly more restricted than the right side.

Other Systems

<PERSON> has problems with her hands, fingers, and hips. In the past, she
would get an occasional bladder infection, but more recently she had a
bladder infection in the summer of 2002 and also in the September and
October time frame. Has nocturia x 1 and sometimes has difficulties
emptying her bladder. She had a total hysterectomy in 1984 secondary to
ovarian cysts and fibroid tumors. She has one son, age 36, and has had
no miscarriages and apparently had no fertility problems. <PERSON> gets an
occasional vaginal yeast infection. She has a history of sties and
occasional conjunctivitis kind of symptoms. She occasionally will get
some burning, itching, and dryness of her eyes that she thinks may be
related to allergies. She has chronic sinus problems. She does not
smoke. She gets right earaches. She used to get bronchitis fairly often
but has not had it in recent years. No known STDs. She does have some
chronic fatigue problems. She had a parakeet for a few years as a child.
She thinks that maybe her brother stepped on it that caused its demise.
She has had cats most of her life, and some did eat birds. She has had
dogs most of her life and also feels that some of them may have gotten
birds, and one in particular which is a birddog. No significant exposure
to hoofed animals. The only implants present are in the jaws with the
bone screws and the P/T chin implant.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Left TMJ arthritis with the presence of a dermal skin graft
    replacing the disc that was placed in 1986

2.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction

3.  Headaches

4.  Moderate to severe TMJ pain

5.  Daytime and nighttime clenching

Recommended Treatment

1.  Consider splint therapy, physical therapy, etc., to try to
    elimination inflammatory process

2.  Consider medications to help decrease the inflammatory process


4.  Treatment option #1

    A.  Right TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament with Mitek
        anchor and discoplasty

    B.  Right mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization

5.  Treatment option #2

    A.  Diskectomy

    B.  Reconstruction of disc with sternoclavicular disc graft

    C.  Right mandibular ramus osteotomy with bone screw stabilization

6.  Treatment option #3

    A.  Left TMJ condylectomy, meniscectomy, and reconstruction with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prosthesis

    B.  Fat graft to right TMJ

but occurred following her teeth cleaning episode.
