<PERSON> is 33 years old. He had an open Nissen procedure in 1993, an AV
node ablation in 1991, nasoseptoplasty in 1996, and tonsillectomy at the
same time. <PERSON>’s problems began when he was 18 years of age where it
would start to click periodically. For about the last two years, it has
clicked constantly when he opens and closes his jaws and it is
predominantly on the right side. The past year he has worn occlusal
splints, but this has not corrected the problem. <PERSON> takes the

1. Paxil 20 mg daily.

2. Tylenol p.r.n.

3. Aleve p.r.n.

He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus nor vertigo. He gets
headaches only about once a month, so the headaches really are not an
issue for him. He rates his TMJ pain at 6, average daily discomfort at
5, jaw function at 5, diet at 4, disability at 2. Primary concerns

1. Clicking and popping particularly in the right joint.

2. TMJ pain.

  3. Soreness through the muscles particularly on the right side of the
  face including the masseter muscle up through the temporalis muscle.

  4. Difficulties eating and chewing.

  5. Difficulties breathing through the nose.

<PERSON> is aware of clenching and bruxism at night. He also does it some
during the day. He has broken a few splints because of that situation.
In frontal view, <PERSON> has good facial symmetry and balance. In
profile view, he has good facial balance vertically and
anteroposteriorly. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back
to the second molars. He has some mandibular tori on the inside of his
lower jaw. In the upper jaw, he has all of his teeth back to the second
molars. He has basically Class I cuspid-molar relationship bilaterally
and about 1 mm vertical overbite. <PERSON> has had all of his wisdom
teeth previously removed. On palpation, he has some mild tenderness over
right TMJ, but nowhere else on the head and neck area. On opening, he
has an extremely loud audible pop. It occurs at about 25-30 mm of
opening with closing pop at about 5 mm. The pop can easily be heard in
the room or even in an adjacent room. Maxillary movement is about 55 mm,
excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction. As he shifts the
mandible towards the left side, he has an audible pop in the right TMJ.
Oropharyngeal exam shows that the tissues look normal and healthy.
Intranasal exam show that the turbinates appear relatively normal in
size, but the septum is deviated severely off towards the left side
obliterating the left side of the nose. He has very minimal air passage
through the left side of his nose.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all fourth and
third molars. Sinuses look relatively clear. I cannot really evaluate
the joints. Right TMJ tomogram shows condyles posteriorly positioned in
the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, both
condyles translate normally. Waters views show that the septum is
deviated significantly off towards the left side causing significant
obliteration there. Sinuses look relatively clear. Lateral cephalometric
radiograph shows good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.
Oropharyngeal airway is well within normal limits.


1. Bilateral TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation with
reduction.

2. Relative mandibular hyperplasia.

3. Right-sided facial pain.

  4. Severely deviated nasal septum off to the left side causing left
  nasal airway obstruction.


1. Surgery.

  <PERSON> articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
  Mitek anchors.

  <PERSON> mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies to maintain a
  good Class I occlusion.

<PERSON> septoplasty (by Dr. <PERSON>).

d. Application of arch bars to maxillary and mandibular teeth.

2. Removal of arch bars 2-4 weeks post surgery.
