<PERSON> 12-12-02

Mick is 54 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

Patient History

He has had previous left knee arthroscopy, and he has had a colonoscopy.
<PERSON> is in good health with no major medical problems. <PERSON> does have a
history of having a fractured jaw in 1967. He had his teeth wired
together for a while. Apparently when he gets up in the morning, he does
have sort of a pop in his right jaw joint, and it seems to function okay
after that. Apparently he doesn’t have much problems with clicking later
on after that initial click.

Patient Concerns

Mick’s primary concerns are that over the last two or three years he has
developed increasing problems with snoring and with sleep apnea
symptoms. He has seen Dr. <PERSON>, an otolaryngologist, who has
suggested a UPPP procedure for <PERSON>. In fact, <PERSON> is scheduled for
surgery next Tuesday. <PERSON> is on a CPAP machine, and this seems to help,
but he detests the use of that machine, and he cannot use it when he
travels. For the last six months, <PERSON> has not been sleeping very well
at all. He does have problems with daytime somnolence, particularly in
the afternoon.

The problems as far as <PERSON> is aware began approximately three years ago
and have been getting progressively worse particularly according to his
wife. <PERSON> has no problems with his nasal airway, no earaches, ringing
in his ear, or vertigo. He has no problems with headaches.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 30 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is
about –2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial
midline as is the chin. <PERSON> is missing a lower what looks like the left
lateral incisor, and, therefore, has just three lower incisors.

In profile view, <PERSON> has some retrusion of the maxilla probably by
about a good 6 mm. <PERSON> appears retruded by probably a good 15 mm.
Chin-neckline is shortened, and chin-neckline not well-defined.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second
molars present, except for missing the left lateral incisor, which is
the area where the fracture was to his mandible. Has some crowns on his
molar teeth. He has a crown on the left cuspid.

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second
molars present. He has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.
Has about 1.5 mm anterior overbite. Uvula is a little bit enlarged but
not too significantly. Faucial pillars appear to be based at a wide
position. They do not appear to be too close in approximation to the
posterior pharynx. The tongue looks moderately large compared to the
size of the oral cavity.

TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly. <PERSON> does appear fairly
clear.

Intranasally, septum is deviated a little bit off towards the right side
at the base and anteriorly. Turbinates are of moderate size. <PERSON> does
report having a previously fractured nose.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular left lateral incisor and all
four third molars. Has a crown on the mandibular right first molar and
left cuspid as well as the maxillary right central incisor. Cannot see
the sinuses very well, but they appear reasonably clear. Cannot see the
turbinates. Cannot see the top of the right condyle, but otherwise the
morphology looks pretty good.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Septum is
deviated. Left turbinate is larger than the right turbinate. No other
significant findings are noted.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology with
maybe some slight narrowness anteroposteriorly. Fossa has a mild slope
to it. There appears to be reasonable joint space around the condyle
superiorly and posteriorly.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle and fossa that appear to have fairly
good morphology. Articular eminence is a little bit steeper on this side
as compared to the opposite side. Joint space looks fairly well
balanced. Opening views show excellent translation in both joints with
the condyles coming completely out anterior to the articular eminences.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible
appear retruded. Oropharyngeal airway space at the soft palate base is
about 3 mm and at the base of the tongue is about 4 mm. Tongue fills the
entire oral cavity.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  AP maxillary deficiency

2.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

3.  AP mandibular deficiency

4.  Hyperplastic soft palate

5.  Hyperplastic uvula

6.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of only 3 mm (normal 11 mm)

7.  Severe sleep apnea

8.  Severe snoring

9.  Daytime somnolence

10. Sleep disorder

11. High occlusal plane angle of 15 degrees (normal 8 degrees)

12. Relative macroglossia (large tongue)

13. Missing mandibular left lateral incisor

Recommended Treatment

  Surgery

A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and
    downgraft it posteriorly

B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a
    counterclockwise direction

C.  Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty

D.  Arch bars to maxilla and mandible
