<PERSON> is 13 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 2845 Parkwood
Blvd., Ste. 100, Plano, TX 75093.

Patient History

Julie has had a previous tonsillectomy. She has some problems with
allergies. She takes allergy antigen. She has had an adverse reaction to
PENICILLIN. Otherwise Julie is in good health with no major medical
problems.

Julie had headgear in about the fourth grade that she wore for about six
to eight months for about 14 hours per day. She also has had a palatal
expander x 2 at about the same time. She has no trouble with earaches,
tinnitus, vertigo, and no clenching or bruxism. No headaches, no TMJ
pain, no pain around the head and neck area. Jaw function at 6, diet at
3, and disability at 2.

Patient Concerns

1.  Teeth and jaws don’t fit together

2.  Difficulties eating and chewing

3.  Choking response that occasionally occurs where she will get
    something caught in her throat when eating and then cough up and
    bring up an excessive amount of mucous material that she cannot
    swallow but has to spit out

4.  Noises in the jaw joints

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-light facial symmetry.
Nasal dorsum and tip are a little bit broad. Upper lip length is about
19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip is about -2 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty
much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1
mm to the left as is chin which is probably a millimeter or 2 to the
left.

In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about
3 to 4 mm. <PERSON> actually looks in fairly good AP position. Chin-neckline
looks relatively normal in length, and chin-neck angle is fairly
well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. Has an accentuated curve of Wilson involving the molars and
second bicuspids. The lower front teeth appear in quite vertical
position. Has really thin attached gingiva around the lower anterior
arch.

In the upper arch, she is missing the first bicuspids. Has a V-shaped
architecture to the upper arch. She has a super Class III cuspid
relationship being probably about 9 mm Class III on the left side and
maybe 10 mm on the right side. She has an anterior open bite of at least
4 to 5 mm. She has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites. In
centric relation, she occludes only on the right first and second molars
and on the left maxillary first and second molar, lower second molar.
All other teeth are out of occlusion. On the right side, the first
molars just barely touch. <PERSON> looks clear. Uvula is a little bit
hyperplastic but not too significantly.

Her turbinates are moderate size, and perhaps at night when she is
sleeping they could provide a little bit of blocking of her nasal
airway. She apparently does a lot of mouth breathing particularly when
she is sleeping. No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck
area. TMJs seem to function smoothly. Slight cant to the occlusion with
the right maxilla being a millimeter higher than the left side and the
right mandible being maybe 2 mm higher than the left side.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates are
moderate in size particularly on the right side and might be excessive
large. There are four impacted third molars. Missing maxillary first
bicuspids. Cannot visualize the condylar heads very well. Condylar heads
and necks appear slightly elongated but not too significantly.

Waters view shows that the nasal septum appears distorted shifting off
toward the right side up superiorly and back in the vomer area then
maybe coming a little bit off toward the left side. Right turbinate
appears enlarged, and the left one is difficult to identify. Left
maxillary sinus appears cloudy compared to the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has some significant anterior
beaking on it that has a hockey stick shape curve to it. Appears to be
decreased posterior and superior joint space. Articular eminence is
relatively shallow. May be an increased anterior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a little bit better shape and
morphology. A little anterior beaking present. Posterior and vertical as
well as anterior joint spaces appear a little bit more well-balanced.
Articular eminence is just slightly steeper and longer on this side as
compared to the opposite side.

On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Cephalometrically, <PERSON> has a skeletal Class III jaw relationship and
occlusion. She has a high occlusal plane angle in the lower arch.
Oropharyngeal airway looks fairly good, except at the base of the tongue
there appears there may be some adenoid tissue. The airway is only about
3.5 mm.

Tooth-size analysis reveals a difference of only 1 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Rule out bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia and articular
    disc dislocations

2.  AP maxillary deficiency

3.  Slight vertical maxillary deficiency

4.  Transverse maxillary deficiency

5.  Mandibular prognathism

6.  Apertognathia

7.  Super Class III occlusion

8.  V-shaped architecture of the upper arch

9.  Missing maxillary first bicuspids bilaterally

10. Occludes only on the left maxillary first and second molars and
    mandibular second molar and the right first and second molars

11. Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars

12. Hypertrophied turbinates

13. Lingual adenoid tissue.

14. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of approximately 3 mm (normal 11 mm)

15. High occlusal plane angle in the mandible of 20 degrees (normal 8
    degrees)

16. Significant difficulties eating and chewing

17. Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side
    being 1 to 2 mm higher than the left side

18. Tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of about 1 mm

19. Significantly increased curve of <PERSON> affecting the mandibular
    bicuspids and molars

Recommended Treatment

1.  Continue to monitor and evaluate facial growth to determine if
    condylar hyperplasia is present or not

2.  MRI of left and right TMJs to be done in the summer of 2005

3.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. . Open about a millimeter of
        space around each upper lateral incisor to help compensate for
        the mild tooth-size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisor roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
        osteotomies

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch

4.  Do final assessment of growth and development

5.  Surgery (The most ideal time would be the summer of 2006)

    A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, expand
        it, and correct the slight vertical maxillary deficiency

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in
        a counterclockwise direction and move it posteriorly

    C.  Consider possible bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and
        articular disc repositioning and ligament repairs if condylar
        hyperplasia verified and/or discs are dislocated

    D.  Surgical removal of four bony impacted third molars

    E.  Possible turbinectomies if nasal airway obstruction is verified

    F.  Removal of lingual tonsils if they did not recede on their own

6.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
