<PERSON> 06-28-04

Diane is 48 years old.

Patient History

<PERSON>’s problems began in <PERSON> when she had a sudden onset of TMJ
problems. She was involved in an MVA in 1986, but this primarily created
problems in the neck and shoulder area, and she wasn’t aware of any
particular problems in the joint. She went to see Dr. <PERSON>. Dr.
<PERSON> did bilateral open joint arthroplasties in 1988. In 1989, she
saw Dr. <PERSON>, who did a left TMJ discectomy and placed a
temporal fascial flap. In 1989, she also had a left coronoidectomy and
also later she had the temple fascial graft clipped. In 02/1991, she had
a left TMJ Christensen total joint prosthesis with chromium cobalt on
methyl methacrylate condylar head. In 1991, she had decompression
through a craniotomy of the fifth cranial nerve.

She has had an adverse reaction to CECLOR and CEPHALOSPORINS. She also
had a reaction this past week to GALLIUM she believes.

<PERSON> has no problems with earaches but does have tinnitus but no
vertigo except occasionally when she gets up. She has some hearing loss.
She has difficulties wearing jewelry, particularly cheap jewelry that
may contain nickel. She is going through menopause. She uses a CPAP
machine although she has been told she does not have sleep apnea, but
No one has been able to really help her with this situation to date. She
gets headaches about once a month that she rates at a level of 8 that
hurt predominantly in the left frontal and temporal area. She rates her
TMJ pain with medications at a level of 7, overall facial pain at 4, jaw
function at 3, diet at 6, and disability at 7. She is on disability and
unable to work at this time.

Patient Concerns

1.  TMJ pain

2.  Headaches

3.  Pain to the left side of head and neck area particularly when
    sleeping

4.  Sleep disorder with prolonged arousals at night even with
    medications

5.  Ringing in the areas

6.  Chills

7.  Difficulties eating and chewing

Current Medications

1.  Zoloft 50 mg q.d. 

2.  Wellbutrin ER 100 mg

3.  Methadone 10 mg t.i.d. and 5 mg tablet usually in the afternoon

4.  Vioxx 25 mg at bedtime

5.  Seroquel 25 mg at bedtime

6.  Zyrtec 10 mg at bedtime

7.  Zonegran 100 mg q.h.s.

8.  Serevent inhaler 2 inhalations b.i.d.

9.  Roxicet 1 tablet q.6h. p.r.n. breakthrough pain

Allergies

CECLOR, CEPHALOSPORINS, and GALLIUM.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Some decreased vertical height on the left side with the left side being
probably 3 mm or so higher than the right side. Upper lip length is
about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 4 mm. Maxillary dental
midline is a little bit off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is
close to being on the facial midline, but <PERSON> is deviated a couple of
millimeters off to the left.

In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4 to 6
mm. Mandible is AP deficient by probably about 10 mm. Chin-neckline is
not well-defined.

Intraorally, she is missing lower first bicuspids. Lower arch is
constricted. The rest of the teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled.
In the upper arch, she is also missing the first bicuspids and has some
transverse deficiency in the upper arch as well. She has basically a
Class I cuspid-molar relationship with an anterior deep-bite of about 4
mm. <PERSON> appears clear. Soft palate might be a little bit
posteriorly positioned. Uvula is relatively normal in size and shape.
Faucial pillars look relatively normal in transverse width. She has some
snoring problems, but her husband is not sure how severe it is. She has
severe problems with daytime somnolence. She takes Provigil 1 tablet a
day. She had to take 1-½ tablets just to get to my office today. She
does have problems with chills. She is on a CPAP machine. She has
increased fullness of her right temporalis muscle compared to the left
temporalis muscle. Even when biting together, there is more activity on
the right side than the left side.

On opening, she has significant audible crepitation in the right TMJ. On
the left side, it seems fairly smooth in function. As she opens, <PERSON>shifts significantly off toward the left side probably 6 to 8 mm.
Maximal incisal opening is about 40 mm. Excursive movements to the right
are 3 mm and to the left 7.5 mm.

Intranasally, turbinates appear to be maybe slightly enlarged but not
too significantly. Appears to have a good nasal airway inside. Luminal
valves appear somewhat constricted. When I told those valves open, she
could breathe better through her nose. She does use the Breathe Right
nasal strips to help open up her airway.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway looks reasonably
clear. All four third molars and all four first bicuspids are missing.
Right TMJ condyle appears flattened on the anterior aspect with a little
bit of peaking on the condylar head. Left TMJ demonstrates the presence
of a Christensen total joint prosthesis with an acrylic head. Seven
screws support the mandibular component to the ramus. Coronoid process
has been cut off, but it is still sitting there and probably joined back
to the mandibular ramus area through a fibrous attachment. Difficult to
tell if there is any fracture of the fossa component, but it appears
from what I can see that it is probably intact.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the presence of the <PERSON> prosthesis. It
appears that there may be some acrylic still remaining between the pin
and condylar component and the fossa. Screws appear to be in position.
Difficult to rule out the possibility of any fracture of the fossa
component.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the condyle posteriorly positioned in the fossa
with decreased posterior and superior joint space. The superior head of
the condyle appears sclerotic. A little bit of anterior beaking present.
Sort of a shallow prominence of the articular eminence.

Open view shows good translation of the right condyle but minimal
translation of the left condyle.

Waters view shows that the sinuses all appear to be clear. There is a
significant difference in vertical position of the angle of the mandible
with the left mandibular angle being at least 10 to 12 mm elevated
compared to the right side. Nasal airway looks good, although she does
have a nasal septal spur back in the bony part of the nose extending out
toward the right side.

Cephalometrically, <PERSON> has a Class I skeletal relationship. The head
is tipped up somewhat. May want to retake this x-ray with the head at a
more normal angulation. Occlusal plane may be somewhat elevated. Upper
incisors in a vertical inclination. Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks
to be fairly adequate with an airway of about 8 mm at the base of the
soft palate level and at the base of the tongue about 13 mm.

Other Systems

She has problems with her little fingers where they catch, some problems
with her left hip, and left knee. In the past few years, she has had
problems with urinary tract infections. She has polyuria and nocturia
two to four times per night. She has had one miscarriage and has no
children. She does have fibrocystic breast disease. She has had a
cervical problems and has had a conization. For the past two years, she
has been getting some oral yeast infections and has been attributed to
an oral steroid that she was taking. She has discontinued that, and this
has helped her. She has some itching associated with allergies around
her eyes but nothing really significant. She gets some seasonal sinus
problems. She used to smoke up to a pack a day but stopped in 1988. She
has tinnitus and some hearing loss. She has had bronchitis probably
about four times. She has adult-onset asthma that began at about the age
of 35. It not sure if she has irritable bowel syndrome. She does have
problems with constipation that she relates to the medications. She has
severe fatigue. She tends to run a low-grade fever. No thyroid problems
she is aware of. No really significant exposure to birds. She has had
some cats and dogs most of her life. No hoofed animals.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Left TMJ Christensen prosthesis with a possible reactive heterotopic
    bone

2.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction
    and probable perforations

3.  AP maxillary deficiency

4.  AP mandibular deficiency

5.  Missing all four first bicuspids

6.  Anterior deep bite

7.  Transverse cant in the occlusion with the maxillary left side being
    1 mm vertically short compared to the right side but the mandible
    being 3 mm vertically short compared to the right side

8.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level

9.  Severe sleep disorder

10. Severe daytime somnolence

11. Decreased oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level with a
    dimension of 5 mm

12. Frequent sleep disruption at night

13. Left-sided headaches

14. Left-sided TMJ pain

15. Left-sided myofascial pain

16. Difficulties eating and chewing

Recommended Treatment

1.  Trial of Klonopin 1 mg tablet, disp. 10, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 4

2.  CT scan of TMJs to include axial, coronal, and sagittal views

3.  Evaluation at Environment Center to rule out hypersensitivities
    (i.e. materials in the prosthesis, environmental factors, molds,
    etc.)

4.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch

5.  Surgery

    A.  Remove left TMJ Christensen prosthesis

    B.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses

    C.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest graft from abdomen)

    D.  Bilateral coronoidectomies

    E.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and level
        transversely

6.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

  They live in an old house. They have been there for about 15 years.
  Quite possibly she should have mold or yeast problems or other factors
  around the house that could be contributing to hypersensitivities and
  subsequently her pain. She says, however, she feels that when she
  wakes up at night it is primarily due to the fact that she can’t catch
  her breath more than she feels that it is related directly to pain. It
  is possible that she could be having some muscle spasms that may be
  causing some hyperfunction of the soft palate, and, thus, decreasing
  her functional airway. Therefore, the pain might indirectly be
  contributing to her sleep problems and her impression that she cannot
  get her breath at night when she is sleeping.
