<PERSON> 7/14/05

Amy is 15 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, Plano, TX. <PERSON> had
previous orthodontic treatment when she was about 8 years old by <PERSON>. She had maxillary expansion appliance and also wore some kind of
headgear to try to correct her anterior crossbite. Apparently at the
completion of the treatment, the bite was reasonably corrected, but it
did not hold and the anterior crossbite returned. She does take Tylenol.
She has no problems with earaches or tinnitus. She gets vertigo with her
headaches, but has no hearing loss. No other joints bother her. No
problems wearing jewelry. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at
night. Her jaw does get tired with use.

PRIMARY CONCERNS

1.  Teeth do not fit together very well.

2.  Headaches.

3.  Jaw gets tired with use.

She gets headaches that she rates at about a level of 7 in the frontal
and temple area that occur about 2 to 3 times per week. They can cause
nausea for her. The pain can escalate to a 9. She does not think she has
any TMJ pain. She could not rate her jaw function. She rates her diet at
about a level of 2. She was also unable to rate her disability. She also
was unable to rate her level of average daily facial pain and headaches.

In the frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 1 mm. <PERSON>, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much on
the facial midline. In profile, <PERSON> has some AP deficiency of probably
about 3 to 4 mm. The mandible appears a little bit prognathic by
probably 3 to 4 mm. Chin-neckline appears a little bit long. She has a
90 degree nasolabial angle. In the closed view, <PERSON> does appear to be
slightly vertically over-closed. It appears that <PERSON> opens her jaws
probably with a 5 mm open bite. The AP position of the chin looks much
better. Chin-neckline looks better balanced in that vertical position as
well. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the
second molars. She has an accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower
arch. There is some very minimal crowding. In the upper arch, she has
all of her teeth except she is missing the first bicuspids. She has a
full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally. She has an anterior
crossbite but the molars have been expanded in the upper arch of first
and second molars bilaterally but the rest of the teeth are in
crossbite. She has a good attached gingiva around the anterior teeth.
Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. The right cuspid is up
probably a good 2 mm from the rest of the anterior teeth. She has an
anterior reverse deep bite of 3 mm. Intraorally, the tissues all look
normal with a normal uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars.
Intranasally, however, the turbinates appear moderately large. The
septum appears reasonably straight. The columella is moderately wide and
the nostrils are somewhat narrow. <PERSON> states that she is a mouth
breather particularly at night when she sleeps. On opening, <PERSON> has
fairly good smoothness of her jaw joints. To palpation, she has rather
high tenderness and discomfort over the styloid areas that she measures
at a level of 8. At the SCMs she registers a 5. In the temporalis and
right TMJ area she registers a 1. The joints seem to function relatively
smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 56 mm. Excursive movement to
the right 6 mm, left 7 mm.

AMY SAGNERI 7/14/05 Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Panorex shows the presence of all 4 third molars in the absence of the
maxillary first bicuspids. Sinuses appear equal. All 4 third molars are
present but unerupted. Difficult to evaluate the condyles.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight. Turbinates
particularly on the right side appear enlarged. Sinuses look relatively
clear although the maxillary sinuses look like there could be some fluid
present.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears reasonably good with
maybe just a little bit of sclerosis on the head but difficult to tell.
Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Joint space is difficult to
evaluate but appears a little bit narrow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have reasonably
morphology. Joint spaces look reasonably balanced. Articular eminence is
relatively shallow. On opening, there is fairly good translation of the
condyles beneath the articular eminence.

Cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class III occlusal
relationship. <PERSON> appears to have a high occlusal plane angle and
slightly overangulated lower incisors. Oral pharyngeal airway looks
fairly good except she has a fairly large adenoid mass up in the
nasopharynx. Turbinates appear to extend just to the posterior aspect of
the hard palate.

BASIC DIAGNOSES

1.  Rule out bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

2.  Rule out bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  AP mandibular prognathism.

5.  Transverse maxillary excess.

6.  Anterior mandibular vertical excess.

7.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

8.  Class III occlusion.

9.  Anterior crossbite and crossbite back through the bicuspids but not
    at the molar area.

10. Slight accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower arch.

11. Mild crowding of the lower anterior arch.

12. Missing maxillary first bicuspids extracted for orthodontics
    reasons.

13. Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x4.

14. Headaches.

15. Myofascial pain.

16. Nasal airway obstruction.

17. Mouth breather.

AMY SAGNERI 7/14/05 Page 3

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT

1.  MRI of left and right TMJs.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
        osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies (if condylar hyperplasia is
        active) and bilateral TMJs articular disc dislocations (if discs
        are dislocated as determined by MRI.)

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward and narrow
        it transversely.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible
        backwards.

    d.  Vertical reduction genioplasty.

    e.  Surgical removal of 4 bony impacted third molars.

    f.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
