<PERSON> 10-22-02

Theresa is 33 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 1107
Gleneagles Drive, Huntsville, <PERSON>. She has seen Dr. <PERSON> in
Birmingham.

Patient History

Theresa has had previous surgeries for sinus problems, endometriosis,
gallbladder, and she also had an ERCP, which is an evaluation of the
bile ducts through endoscopic type evaluation. She apparently had some
significant water retention problems from one of her surgeries including
pulmonary edema and gaining about 20 pounds in fluid retention. They
thought she was going into ARDS but pulled out of it. <PERSON> was
involved in a motor vehicle accident in 1989 and sustained multiple
internal injuries, and this has required several operative procedures.

<PERSON> feels her problems with her jaws may have begun around 1989 when
she was involved in an MVA and sustained her internal injuries. She also
hit her jaw in that accident, although she had no acknowledged
fractures. She has developed significant headache problems, and she has
had sinus surgery x 2 trying to correct those problems. She has a
significant history of nocturnal clenching and bruxism. She gets
headaches daily and frequently wakes up with headaches. On the average,
her headaches run at about a level of 7 and occur in the frontal,
temporal, and posterior head area. They, however, can escalate to a
level of 10.

Theresa rates her TMJ pain and discomfort about a level of 5
particularly on the job, overall pain at 8, jaw function at 2, diet and
disability at 4.

Patient Concerns


1.  Headaches.

2.  Neck and shoulder pain.

3.  TMJ pain.

4.  Teeth don’t fit together very well.

5.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

Current Medications


1.  Ultrace MT-18.

2.  Clarinex.

Clinical Evaluation

Frontal view shows that <PERSON> has some relatively good left-to-right
facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth to lip
relationship is 3 mm. Maxillary dental midline is fairly close to being
on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 to 2
mm to the left. <PERSON> is pretty much on the facial midline.

In profile view, <PERSON> has a little bit of deficiency in the maxillary
projection. Mandible is maybe just slightly retruded. <PERSON> is relatively
prominent compared to the AP position of the lower lip. Chin-neckline is
slightly short. Chin-neck angle is not well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. Mandibular left first bicuspid is partially blocked out of the
arch, and the second bicuspid is rotated probably about 80 degrees. Some
mild crowding, lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva.
She has significant abrasions of the lower anterior teeth. She has an
accented curve of occlusion in the lower arch. In the upper arch, she
has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class I
cuspid relationship bilaterally but with a division II malocclusion
anteriorly. She has an anterior deep-bite of probably a good 8 mm. She
has a reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. She has a crossbite
in the left mandibular first bicuspid area. Transversely, maxillary arch
is fairly level, but on the left side, the bicuspids are down just a
little bit, probably 1 to 1.5 mm. She has some noises in her joints
bilaterally to palpation, but by placing the fingers in the ears, she
has definite popping in both joints with an opening pop at probably
around 15 mm and a closing pop at about 5 mm. Maximal incisal opening is
42 mm counting the overbite. Excursive movements are about 8 mm in each
direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the sinuses are clear and nasal airway actually looks
quite good. She is missing all four third molars. Accentuated curve of
occlusion is noted in the lower arch. <PERSON> look fairly good with a
little flattening posteriorly on the anterior head. Articular eminences
are very steep, being a little bit greater steepness on the right side
as compared to the left side. No other abnormalities noted.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is very flattened in the
posterior head area. Superior joint space actually appears to be
increased, although posterior joint space appears to be diminished some.
Articular eminence is quite steep with probably about 85% inclination.

Right TMJ tomogram shows some flattening on the anterior head of the
condyle. Superior anterior joint space appears slightly increased,
although the posterior joint space may be slightly decreased. Also,
there appears to be increased anterior joint space between the bottom
part of the condylar head and the articular eminence. Articular eminence
is quite steep on this side being probably 80% to 85% of inclination.

On opening, there is good translation of both TMJs.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Nasal airway looks fairly
good. Jaws are fairly symmetric, although the lower dental midline is
off to the left.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows probably a skeletal Class I kind
of position with a Class I occlusion but division II malocclusion
anteriorly. She has a low occlusal plane angle facial morphology. <PERSON>
is prominent relative to the position of the lower incisors.
Oropharyngeal airway looks to be within normal range. <PERSON> appears
clear. Some mild crenations on the tongue.

Intranasally, turbinates are of moderate size with the left one being
larger than the right side. However, the nasal airway appears fairly
good. Slightly wide columella base but probably not causing a
significant problem.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations in a
    vertical orientation and presence of very steep articular eminences.

2.  Relative mandibular hyperplasia.

3.  Slight AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Class I division II occlusion.

5.  Vertical inclination of maxillary incisors.

6.  Significant vertical inclination of mandibular incisors.

7.  Anterior deep-bite of approximately 7 to 8 mm.

8.  Crowding, lower anterior arch, particularly in the left bicuspid
    area.

9.  Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the left of the
    facial and chin midline.

10. Headaches.

11. TMJ pain.

12. Earaches.

13. Vertigo.

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Correct reverse curve of
        occlusion. Tip upper incisors forward approximately 2 mm. Keep
        upper lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots
        tipped distally to allow for interdental osteotomies if they are
        necessary.

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Tip lower incisors forward at
        least 2 to 3 mm. Try to level the accentuated curve of occlusion
        in the lower arch.

    C.  Consider using a bite plate to open bite in order to place
        appliances on the lower arch and to allow orthodontic access to
        align and level the arches. Upper splint may work the best to
        allow better access to the lower arch alignment and leveling.
        Could leave the maxillary incisors out of the splint to enable
        forward and upward repositioning of those teeth.

2.  Surgery

    A.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies with bone screw
        stabilization.

    C.  Consider possible maxillary osteotomies if necessary to achieve
        the best functional and aesthetic outcome.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

I gave <PERSON> a prescription for Klonopin 1 mg tablets, disp. 30
tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x 4.
