<PERSON> is 20 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, Plano,
Texas. <PERSON> has been diagnosed as having <PERSON> syndrome.
She has had previous orthodontics from the age of 7 to 9.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS

1. Cymbalta 60 mg q.d.

2. Bactrim DS q.d.

She has had multiple reconstructions around her eyes, cheeks and nose by
Dr. <PERSON>. She has probably had about 15 procedures performed so
far. She has had no work done on her jaws. Besides facial
reconstruction, she has had her tonsils and adenoids removed at age 6.
She has a Baha hearing aide. She also has been diagnosed as having
scoliosis and she has had gallstones removed.

PRIMARY CONCERNS

1. Teeth and jaws do not fit together.

2. Only a couple of her teeth meet on either side.

3. Sleep apnea.

4. Difficulty breathing.

5. Severe snoring.

6. Difficulties eating and chewing.

7. Facial imbalance.

8. Unhappy with ear reconstruction.

9. Jaw joints click and pop.

10. Nasal airway obstruction.

11. Predominately mouth breather.

<PERSON> apparently has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo
and is not aware of any clenching or bruxism. She does have profound
hearing loss as she has no ear canals and part of her middle ears is
absent. She also has some nerve damage.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has some significant deficiencies in the
upper orbital area. Nasal bridge is a little bit wide. Nose deviates a
little bit off to the right side and then back towards the left. Upper
lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3
mm. There is some depression in the bitemporal areas towards the
anterior aspect. Palpebral fissures are narrow with the left side being
more narrow than the right side. Right pupil is dilated compared to the
left one. Right eye is about 4 to 5 mm higher than the left eye.
Maxillary midline is about 3 mm off to the left and mandibular dental
midline is about 2 mm off to the right. Mandibular dental midline and
chin are fairly well aligned with each other. The chin also is a couple
of mm off to the right side. There is about 1 mm vertical reverse
overbite. In profile view, the maxillary is retruded about 3 to 4 mm.
Lower lip is reverting. <PERSON> is probably 8 to 10 mm AP deficient. She
has lip incompetence of probably about 10 mm. <PERSON> neckline is short.
She has a head postured forward neck position. Intraorally, she has all
of her lower teeth back through the second molar. Some severe crowding
in the lower anterior arch.

<PERSON> Page 2

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second
molar. She has arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 3 to 4 mm
posterior to the right cuspid. In the lower arch, the right cuspid is
about 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. She has anterior and bilateral
posterior crossbites. She has a super Class III cuspid relationship on
the left side and a full Class III on right side. Transverse occlusal
plane is a little bit angulated with the left side being slightly higher
by maybe 1 to 2 mm compared to the right side. She has a huge posterior
alveoli around the molars extending quite a way towards the midline of
the palate. The soft palate is relatively short but oropharynx is far
anterior and the soft palate appears to touch the posterior pharyngeal
areas. Transverse width of the maxillary arch appears constricted. She
has a relatively high arched palate over these huge bony protuberances
that take up probably 1/2 to 2/3 of the width of the posterior palate.
The uvula is extremely small in size. It appears that only her molars
may be touching posteriorly. The uvula is actually hypoplastic. The soft
palate is hypoplastic. The faucial pillars are probably mildly
constricted. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the left side
with some spurring. The turbinates do not appear very large anteriorly
but cannot assess posterior airway space and alignment. To palpation,
<PERSON> has tenderness around the head and neck area. Incisal opening
is about 30 mm maximum, not particularly painful. Excursive movement to
the right may be 1.5 and at the most 2 mm, to the left 1 mm movement.
Joints seem to function relatively smoothly. She is not aware of any
numbness to the head and facial areas. Frontal branches of the facial
nerve are nonfunctional but the rest of the branches appear to work
adequately.

RADIOGRAPH EVALUATION

Panorex shows the presence of all 4 impacted third molars. There are a
number of wires seen in the zygomatic arch areas. Difficult to identify
condyles except the left one looks better than the right one. Very
prominent antegonial angles. Significantly decreased posterior vertical
mandibular height with the molar roots at the level of the inner cortex
of the inferior border. Difficult to evaluate sinuses and nasal airway.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are small particularly on the left
side. <PERSON> frontal sinuses. They actually obscure the superior orbital
rims. Some defects in the lateral and nasal bones on the left side.
Septum deviates significantly off toward the left side with what appears
to be a break in the bony septum. Turbinates appear large particularly
on the left side at the inferior turbinate level. Middle and upper
turbinates appear enlarged on the right side. Lots of wires seen
particularly around the zygomatic arch areas bilaterally.

Left TMJ shows a rudimentary ear canal. <PERSON> appears to be present
although deformed. The fossa is not well defined. Superior joint space
appears relatively normal but the posterior joint space appears quite
constricted. Appears to occlude primarily on the molar teeth.

Left TMJ tomogram again shows difficulty identifying the joint and the
condyle. There is evidence of the condyle being present. Difficult to
evaluate joint spaces. Difficult to identify the outline of the fossa
and articular eminence. Ear canal is not as readily identified on this
side as the opposite side. On opening, there appears to be minimal
translation of the condyles.

<PERSON> Page 3

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has actually a skeletal
Class I but an occlusal Class III jaw relationship. She has a severely
decreased oropharyngeal airway space of probably less than 2 mm, maybe
only 1 mm at the level of the tip of the soft palate. Airway superiorly
is only about 3 mm, at the uvula level may be 1 mm and at the base of
the tongue only about 2 to 3 mm at the most. She has a high occlusal
plane angle. Teeth do not look overly angulated but this is probably
masked because of the high occlusal plane angle. She has a reverse
curvature over the cervical spine.

BASIC DIAGNOSES

1.  <PERSON> syndrome.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  AP mandibular deficiency.

5.  Severe Class III occlusion.

6.  High occlusal plane angle of 21 degrees.

7.  Maxillary midline shifted 3 mm to the left and mandibular dental
    midline and chin shifted 2 mm to the right.

8.  Orbital dystopia with the right eye being about 4 mm higher than the
    left one.

9.  AP microgenia.

10. Significant crowding of anterior maxillary arch and mandibular
    anterior arch.

11. Maxillary arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being 3 to 4 mm
    posterior to the right one and blocked out of the arch.

12. Mandibular arch asymmetry with the right cuspid being 2 mm posterior
    to the left cuspid.

13. Large alveolar mass extensions towards the midline of the palate
    adjacent to the first and second molars.

14. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with the nearest measurement
    of 1 mm (normal dimension 11 mm.)

15. Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars.

16. Deviated nasal septum with septal spurring.

17. Hypertrophied left turbinate.

18. Significant nasal airway obstruction.

19. Severe sleep apnea.

20. Snoring.

21. Significant daytime somnolence.

22. Severe snoring.

23. Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia.

24. Bilateral eyelid and palpebral deformity.

25. Hypoplasia of TMJ joints.

<PERSON> 10/25/2005 Page 4

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT

1.  MRI of left and right TMJs.

2.  Surgery stage 1.

    a.  Extract 4 impacted third molars.

    b.  Extract mandibular second bicuspids, maxillary left second
        bicuspid and right first bicuspid.

3.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Shift maxillary midline 3 mm to
        the right to the facial midline.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

4.  CT scan with 3-D modeling to aide in jaw reconstruction.

5.  Surgery stage 2.

    a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, down graft the
        posterior aspect, correct any transverse arch discrepancies.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to counterclockwise
        rotate the mandible tipping the incisors posteriorly and
        advancing the chin.

    c.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance the inferior
        border of the mandible and augment the chin.

    d.  Nasoseptoplasty.

    e.  Turbinectomy.

6.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

7.  Surgery stage 3.

    a.  Bilateral infraorbital reconstruction.

    b.  Bilateral eyelid and canthal tendon reconstruction.

    c.  Consider external rhinoplasty.

8.  Reevaluate ears (consult with Dr. <PERSON> and Dr. <PERSON>)

9.  Surgery stage 4.

    a.  Osseointegrated implants in the temple area.

    b.  Construction of prosthetic ears.
