<PERSON> 04-16-04

Shawn is 16 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 2845 Parkwood
Blvd., Ste. 100, Plano, TX 75093.

Patient Concerns

1.  His jaws and teeth don’t align and fit together

2.  Has clicking in the jaw joints

3.  Cannot shift his jaws from side-to-side

4.  TMJ pain

5.  Significant difficulties eating and chewing

6.  Difficulties breathing through the nose

7.  Predominantly a mouth breather

8.  Discomfort around the head and neck area

9.  Lack of enamel on teeth

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 2.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline
mandibular dental midline is shifted a little bit to the left about 2
mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned
with each other.

In profile view, he has some prominence of the nasal dorsum. Some
infraorbital hypoplasia of probably about 4 or 5 mm. Upper lip
supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by probably a couple of
millimeters. <PERSON> is probably about 6 to 8 mm retruded. Lower third
face appears elongated. <PERSON> actually appears slightly retruded
anteroposteriorly. Chin-neckline is short, although chin-neck angle is
well-defined. <PERSON> may be retruded as much as 10 to 15 mm. <PERSON> has
some mild lip incompetence of probably about 3 mm.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has his lower teeth back through the second molars
erupted in. Some crowding, lower anterior arch and significant lingual
inclination. Lacking enamel on his teeth. Has some bonding already done
particularly in the left posterior quadrant. Appears to have adequate
attached gingiva although thin in some areas. In the upper arch, he has
his teeth back through the first molars erupted in. Has bonding on most
of those teeth already. Has a super Class III cuspid relationship on the
left side and a full Class III on the right side. Has an anterior open
bite of about 4 mm. Crossbite tendency on the left side and anteriorly.
Has a reverse curve of occlusion in the lower arch. The only teeth that
occlude on the left side are the maxillary second bicuspid and first
molar and mandibular first and second molars. On the right side, the
right first and second bicuspid and first molar in the upper arch
occlude against the second bicuspid, first and second molar in the lower
arch. Transverse occlusal plane is fairly level. Maxillary left cuspid
is a millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. In the lower arch, the
left cuspid is a millimeter anterior to the right cuspid, and this would
probably account for the super Class III occlusion on the left side
while the mandibular dental midline is shifted slightly to the left.
<PERSON> appears clear, and tissues look normal. Has a high palatal
vault. Maximal incisal opening is 61 mm. He had no voluntary abilities
to go into excursive movements. With hand manipulation by me, I could
get maximum of about 1 to 2 mm in each direction.

Turbinates appear moderately enlarged. <PERSON> is a little bit wide,
and nostrils are narrow. Luminal valves are somewhat constricted
intranasally. <PERSON> says that he wakes up with a dry mouth almost every
morning. There is no evidence of snoring or sleep apnea type of
problems.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that there is a significant enamel hypoplasia or dysplasia
on most all of the teeth. Has two fairly good size carious lesions on
the distal of the mandibular right first molar, mesial aspect of the
second molar. He has impacted third molars, and the maxillary second
molars are not quite erupted in all the way, although they may be
peaking through. Sinuses look relatively clear. Difficult to evaluate
the nasal cavity. <PERSON> are not well-seen.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Septum has some
deviation, and in couple areas there appear to be some septal spurs.
Turbinates appear moderate in size but the right one is larger and
appears to block off the right nasal airway.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.
Joint space appears decreased superiorly. Articular eminence is
moderately shallow.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that likewise appears to have fairly
reasonable morphology but decreased superior joint space. It is actually
difficult to identify the superior aspect of the condyle on these views.

Open views show good translation of the condyles.

Cephalometrically, <PERSON> appears to have large turbinates. Maxilla is AP
deficient and mandible appears prognathic. He has a skeletal Class III
jaw relationship. High occlusal plane angle is present. Oropharyngeal
airway is extremely large. Tongue appears relatively small compared to
the size of the oral cavity. Lower third face appears quite long
vertically. With the teeth in their current situation with some of the
upper teeth being already reconstructed and the lower anterior teeth not
having undergone any reconstruction yet, there is a reverse tooth-size
discrepancy of a little bit less than 2 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations

2.  Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia

3.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess

4.  AP maxillary deficiency

5.  Mandibular deviate prognathism

6.  Bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia

7.  Full Class III occlusion on the right side, super Class III
    occlusion on the left side

8.  High occlusal plane angulation

9.  Generalized severe enamel hypoplasia

10. Anterior open bite of about 4 mm

11. Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4

12. Impacted unerupted bilateral maxillary second molars (possible
    ankylosis)

13. Reverse curve of occlusion, lower arch

14. Significant lack of eruption of first and second molars bilaterally
    at the mandible

15. Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites with the crossbite on
    the left side worse than the right side

16. Carious lesions in mandibular right first and second molars

17. Hypertrophied turbinates

18. Nasal septal spurs

19. Nasal airway obstruction

20. TMJ pain

21. Myofascial pain

22. Masticatory dysfunction

Recommended Treatment

1.  General dentistry

    A.  Eradicate dental caries on the mandibular right distal first
        molar, mesial second molar

    B.  Bonding to all the teeth

2.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Consider placing a slight
        downward step to the molars since the mandibular molars are
        hypoerupted. Try to extrude the lower incisors a millimeter or
        two to help decrease the reverse curve of occlusion in the
        anterior portion of the arch

3.  Surgery

    A.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors (consider high condylectomies if active
        condylar hyperplasia is confirmed)

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla

    C.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in
        a counterclockwise direction into occlusion

    D.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies

    E.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x 4

    F.  Consider extracting maxillary unerupted second molars x 2

    G.  Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy

    H.  Nasal septoplasty

    I.  Rhinoplasty

    J.  Consider bilateral infraorbital augmentations

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

5.  Final restorative dentistry to build up molars into occlusion and
    any other restorative work necessary
