<PERSON> 02-06-04

<PERSON> is 24 years old. Her surgery was 1-1/2 years ago on 07/11/02 and
included bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
prostheses, multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plates and HA
grafting, and turbinectomies. She had been doing fairly well until about
two months ago when she started to develop significant pain problems
around the left side of the head and neck area. There is no specific
etiological factor that initiated the problem. <PERSON> does have
longstanding GI problems and prior to her surgery was diagnosed with an
ulcer and H. pylori. She was diagnosed two years prior to her surgery
with the H. pylori ulceration. Following treatment of that, her stomach
did settle down somewhat. She is continuing to have problems all along
with her GI system, but it slowly seems to be elevating in associated
problems. Her current diagnosis is severe gastritis. She does get some
numbness in her hands with the left side being worse than the right
side. This seems to occur later in the day particularly after she has
done a lot of typing. The numbness does not seem to affect her shoulders
or arms but mainly from just above the wrists down to the hands.
Sometimes it will occur even without typing. If she gets a sinus
infection, then she may follow with an ear infection, and she gets ear
infections on just the left side about three times per year. Prior to
the surgery, she did have a severe Pseudomonas infection of her left ear
that was treated. She has had an increase in the ear infections since
surgery. The left side of her face turns red on occasion and can be warm
to the touch. Those changes of redness and warmth to the touch occurs on
a daily basis. These changes did occur prior to those last two months,
but since the last two months, it has increased in occurrence. She
states she does get some drainage from her left ear but usually
associated only with the left ear infections.

Clinical Examination

Examination today shows that both ears are clear and look quite healthy.
No evidence of inflammation, drainage, or granulation tissue in either
ear.


1.  <PERSON>.  <PERSON>

3.  Compazine p.r.n. nausea

4.  Darvocet p.r.n. pain

She gets left earaches, occasional left tinnitus, but no vertigo or
hearing loss. <PERSON> gets headaches about four times per week
predominantly in the left temporal area. She gets TMJ pain on the left
side only that averages about a level of 7 but can escalate to 9. She
gets headaches in the left temporal area at a level of 8. She rates her
jaw function at 4, diet at 2, and disability at 4. Maximal incisal
opening is 41 mm and 35 mm without significant discomfort. Excursive
movements are about 2 mm in each direction. Occlusion looks very stable.
When she bites, she feels that both sides touch at the same time. She is
not aware of nocturnal clenching or bruxism. <PERSON> usually feels it
best in the morning when she wakes up. However, her current job requires
her to talk at least 6 hours per day, and it is toward the end of the
day that she develops her significant headache problems.

To palpation, she has high moderate to low severe tenderness over the
left TMJ, left styloid area, high moderate tenderness over the left
medial pterygoid, and moderate tenderness over the masseter and
temporalis on the left side.

<PERSON> believes that she may chew more on the left side than the right
side. <PERSON> feels that the pain problems on the left side seem to be
generated more from talking than from eating. By palpation, I really
cannot palpate any lymph node involvement to any significance. She has
previously tried Celebrex, but that did not agree with her. We had her
on Vioxx after the surgery, and she was able to tolerate that. When
<PERSON> gets the redness and warm feeling in the left side of her face,
this usually begins in the afternoon, and she goes home and ices
herself, and this seems to make it dissipate. This phenomenon lasts for
about an hour generally, but that includes her treatment. She does feel
that it does come and go throughout the day, but she does have this one
episode that is more significant in the afternoon.

<PERSON> Page 2

Radiographic evaluation shows the presence of the mandibular prostheses.
Screws all appear to be in place and intact. Fossa components are both
present and appear to be in place and intact. Joint space is noted which
would be the presence of the polyethylene bilaterally. She has four bone
plates in the upper jaw, and all appear to be in position, and all
screws seem to be in good position. Synthetic bone grafts are seen on
the left side.

Right TMJ shows the prosthesis appears to be in place and intact. No
evidence of any significant heterotopic bone around the prosthesis. Good
joint space where the polyethylene is located and is normal.

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a prosthesis that appears to be in good
position, and all bone screws seem to be well-seated. The fossa
component appears to be in place and appears to be well adapted to the
bone structures. Could be just a small area of calcification anterior to
the head of the condyle but not too significant.

Cephalometrically, <PERSON> appears to have good facial balance and
symmetry.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Myositis of the left temporalis, masseter, and medial pterygoid
    muscles

2.  Left TMJ inflammation

3.  Left TMJ pain

4.  Left earache

5.  Occasional tinnitus

6.  Left-sided earache

7.  Periodic daily bouts of redness and warm feeling on the left side

8.  GI problems (current diagnosis severe gastritis)

9.  Occasional ear infections (approximately three times per year)

10. Headaches that occur about four times per week in the left temporal
    area

11. Predominant left-sided chewing

Recommended Treatment

1.  Try to chew on the right side instead of the left

2.  Vioxx 25 mg tablet, disp. 30, 1 tablet q.d.

3.  Consider an appointment with Dr. <PERSON> for splint
    construction and perhaps physical therapy

4.  Test for food allergies or other environmental allergic responses.
    This also could be contributing to the GI problems

5.  If no resolution, consider tomographic assessment of the jaw areas
