<PERSON> 10/19/2007

<PERSON> is 35 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 18370 Burbank
Blvd., #711, Tarzana, CA 71356 and also by Dr. <PERSON>, 5525
Etiwanda Ave., Tarzana, CA 91356 and Dr. <PERSON>. The only previous
surgery she has had was removal of her wisdom teeth in 1997.

etiology. She had a little bit of clicking and was developing discomfort
in her joints. The situation got progressively worse overtime. About the
age of 20 to 32 years, she underwent splint therapy with 4 different
splints but she did not find them helpful. In fact, she feels that they
probably made her pain worse. She also had had acupuncture, massage and
physical therapy. She went to the Cedar Sinai Hospital Pain Institute
and was treated there with no improvement.


1.  Prenatal vitamins.

2.  Darvocet 100, three to four per week.

3.  Zoloft 25 me every other day.

4.  Valium 10 mg about once a week.

5.  Advil, three to five times per week.


1.  Severe TMJ pain.

2.  Headaches.

3.  Crackling and popping in the joints.

4.  Periodic closed lock situation in the right joint.

5.  Depression caused by the chronic pain.

Her objectives are to improve her quality of life and eliminate the pain
and constant crackling noises in her joints. She wants to start a family
soon and wants to be over her current situation. <PERSON> gets headaches
that occur most prominently behind the left eye and in the back of the
head area. She rates the intensity at about a level of 8. She rates her
TMJ pain at a level of 8, average daily pain 7, jaw function 8, diet at
6 and disability at 6. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus,
vertigo or hearing loss and no other joints bother her. She is not aware
of clenching or bruxism.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial symmetry. The left side
of the mandible appears a little bit shorter vertically than the right
side which would correlate to the MRI findings. Upper lip length is 24
mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1.5 mm. Maxillary midline
is shifted just about 1 mm to the left and mandibular dental midline is
shifted about 2 mm to the right. <PERSON> maybe just slightly to the left
side. In profile view, she has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of
just maybe 2 mm. <PERSON> is slightly AP deficient by maybe about 6 mm.
Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. She has space between the left first bicuspid and cuspid. In the
upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She
is Class II end-on on the right side by probably 4 to 5 mm and Class I
on the left side.

<PERSON> 10/19/2007 Page 2

Mandibular right cuspid is about 1 mm to 2 mm posterior to the left
cuspid. In the upper arch, the left cuspid may be about 1 mm posterior
to the right cuspid. Slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane with
the left side being about 1.5 mm higher than the right side. She has and
anterior deep bite of about 3.5 mm. To palpation, she has high moderate
pain in the masseters, TMJs, styloid area, SCMs, posterior neck and low
severe pain in the shoulders as well as milder pain of the temporalis
and medial pterygoids. Maximal incisal opening is 48 mm but only about
20 mm without pain and discomfort. Excursive movements are about 6 mm in
each direction. On opening, she has crepitus in both joints with the
left side being a little bit louder than the right. She occasionally
gets a loud audible pop in the right TMJ and it occurred during the MRI
but at the evaluation the disc on the right was displaced and
non-reducing. The oropharyngeal airway looks relatively normal.
Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged. Radiographically,
the left one was enlarged but clinically the right one appears to be
enlarged more than the left one. The septum appears reasonably straight.
There may be mild nasal airway obstruction.


Panorex shows the presence of a root canal in the maxillary right
central incisor. All four third molars are absent. The condyles appear
arthritic particularly on the left side. The left condyle has lost some
vertical height compared to the right side. The left sinus appears a
little bit cloudy compared to the right side. Styloid processes are
calcified and elongated.

Waters view shows that the left sinus appears just slightly cloudy
compared to the right side. The left nasal airway appears blocked
compared the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic.
Articular eminence is excessively long in length and moderate in
inclination. The condyle appears short vertically.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic but
longer in length although there does appear to be some loss of vertical
condylar volume. Articular eminence is moderately steep and
significantly sorter in length compared to the opposite side. On
opening, there is some restricted translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is mild AP deficiency
in the maxilla and mandible. There is significant vertical asymmetry at
the occlusal plane level and also at the inferior border of the mandible
with the left side being shorter than the right side. The soft palate
appears somewhat elongated. The oropharyngeal airway measures about 6 mm
at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue about 8 to 9 mm.


1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with a non-salvageable disc on the
    left side.

2.  Severe TMJ pain.

3.  Headaches.

4.  AP maxillary deficiency.

5.  AP mandibular deficiency.

<PERSON> 10/19/2007 Page 3

6.  Class I cuspid relationship on the left side.

7.  Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side.

8.  Hypertrophied soft palate.

9.  Snoring.

10. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.



1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down graft it
        posteriorly.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    d.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

4.  Postsurgical physical therapy if necessary.


1.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
        prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.

    c.  Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP.)

    d.  Postsurgical physical therapy if necessary.
