<PERSON> 02/02/2007

<PERSON> is 17 years old and is referred by <PERSON>, DDS, 320 E.
North Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15212. <PERSON> became aware of having some
difficulties with her jaws at about the age of 15. She, however, had
been in orthodontic treatment since about the age of 8 years old. In
June of 2005, she underwent surgery for a mandibular advancement. At 6
months a relapse was already noted. She had her orthodontic appliances
removed in about October of 2005 and then shortly after that the relapse
was noted and it has gotten progressively worse for her. <PERSON> takes no
medications. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo. No
other joints bother her except she does have some bunions on her toes
but they do not bother her. No known allergies and no problems wearing
jewelry. She does not clench or brux to her knowledge. She gets
headaches maybe two times a week at about a level of 2 that occur
predominately in the frontal and near the anterior temple area. She gets
just an occasional pain in her TMJs at about a level of 2 predominately
on the right side. Otherwise, on a daily basis she has no facial pain or
headache problems. She rates her jaw function, diet and disability at 0.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has some asymmetry in the nasal structures.
Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 3 mm on the left and 4 mm on the right. Maxillary midline is
pretty much on the facial midline. Nasal tip is off to the left side
probably about 3 mm. <PERSON> is deviated off to the left side probably
about 2 to 3 mm but lower midline is pretty much on the facial midline.
Actually in her centric relation the lower dental midline is about 1 mm
off to the left and the chin is probably about 4 to 5 mm off to the
left. In profile view, she has some AP maxillary deficiency of about 3
mm. <PERSON> appears to be retruded by approximately 15 mm. Chin-neckline is
short and chin-neck angle is not well defined. As <PERSON> postures her
mandible forward as far as she can it significantly improves her facial
profile. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her teeth from the second
molars. The transverse width of the arch is somewhat narrow. She has a 3
x 3 retainer. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower
anterior arch. There is some minor crowding in the lower anterior arch.
In the upper arch, <PERSON> has all of her teeth back through the second
molars. She has some accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
Perhaps a slight accentuated curve of Wilson in the posterior arch. In
centric relation she hits a little bit prematurely on the right side in
the second molar area but then as she bites down harder the left side
also comes in contact. It appears that the molars touch together in her
centric relation. There is some transverse deficiency in the maxillary
arch as well. She has a Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the
left side as compared to the right side. She is probably a 5 to 6 mm
Class II on the left and probably 3 to 4 mm Class II on the right. She
has about a 2 mm anterior open bite. As <PERSON> postures her mandible
forward in a Class I position, she has adequate maxillary width.
Intraorally, the oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. The uvula is mildly
enlarged. Soft palate and faucial pillars look normal. Intranasally,
turbinates are moderately enlarged particularly on the left side. Septum
is deviated off to the right side. It appears that she probably has mild
to moderate nasal airway obstruction. The condyle is a little bit wide
and nostrils are a little bit narrow particularly on the left side. She
does relate that she does snore. However, she is not aware of any
daytime somnolence except for when she does not go to bed early. She is
not aware of any sleep apnea problems. To palpation, <PERSON> has some
very minimal tenderness over the masseter muscles in the styloid areas.
She actually has no tenderness over the TMJs. Joints function smoothly.
Maximal incisal opening is 49 mm.

Excursive movements are about 7 to 8 mm in each direction. She has some
decreased sensation to the right lower lip and chin area. This occurred
following the previous surgery.

<PERSON> 02/02/2007 Page 2


Panorex shows the presence of bone plates in the mandible bilaterally
from the previous sagittal split osteotomies. Sinuses look relatively
clear. Difficult to evaluate the nasal airway. Both TMJs show severe
condylar resorption vertically and anteroposteriorly. <PERSON> appear to
be postured on the articular eminences. Maxillary incisors have
significantly foreshortened the roots. In fact, the crown length is
actually longer than the root system. This also could be true in the
lower anterior arch although the angulation of the lower teeth obscures
some of the ability to tell the root length.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Frontal sinuses are
large. Nasal septum is a little bit off to the right side in bony area.
Turbinates appears moderately enlarged.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that the condylar heads are essentially gone
from resorption. <PERSON> are postured forward in the fossa probably
about 4 mm and are sitting on the inferior posterior aspect of the
articular eminence. There is probably only about 5 mm of vertical height
left above the sigmoid notch. Bone plate is seen in the left sagittal
split area.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also is pretty much resorbed
away. <PERSON> is sitting a little bit forward in the fossa probably
about 3 mm. Articular eminence is a little bit flattened. <PERSON> is
functioning on the posterior slope of the articular eminence. The bone
plate is seen in the left mandibular sagittal split area. On opening,
there is actually fairly good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has some anterior
vertical maxillary excess. Mandible is AP retruded. She has a Class II
skeletal and occlusal relationship. She has anterior open bite. She has
a significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of only about maybe 3.5
mm at the base of the soft palate (normal 11 mm.) Airway at the base of
the tongue, however, is closer to about 9 mm. She has a high occlusal
plane angle facial morphology. Turbinates extend posterior to the hard
palate probably about 4 to 5 mm. She has a little bit of adenoid tissue
still remaining in the nasopharynx but not too much.

Dental model analysis shows that <PERSON> has some mild crowding in the
lower anterior arch. Transverse width of both maxillary and mandibular
is quite narrow. She does have a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower anterior
arch. She has a significantly accentuated curve of occlusion in the
upper arch. The incisor and cuspids are elevated relative to the
bicuspids and first molar. Second molars are also elevated due to the
abnormal occlusion which she currently has. She does have a tooth size
discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 1.5 to 2 mm.


1.  Bilateral TMJ juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.

2.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  AP mandibular deficiency.

5.  AP microgenia.

6.  Class II occlusion.

7.  Anterior open bite.

8.  Occluding only on the molar teeth.

9.  Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.

<PERSON> 02/02/2007 Page 3

10. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

11. Hypertrophied turbinates.

12. Deviated nasal septum.

13. Nasal airway obstruction.

14. Snoring.

15. High occlusal plane angle.

16. Severe resorption on maxillary and mandibular incisors.

17. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 2 mm.

18. Mild crowding of lower anterior arch.

19. External nasal deformity.


1.  Blood tests.

    <PERSON>.

    b.  Rheumatoid factor.

    c.  Coralline.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch in two occlusal plane levels.
        Align the 4 incisors at a higher level than the posterior teeth
        and extrude the cuspids 1 to 2 mm to level them with the
        posterior teeth. Place brackets on all the teeth but do not
        incorporate the second molars in the archwire.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth
        size discrepancy. Place brackets on all the teeth but do not
        incorporate the second molars in the archwire.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, move the
        anterior aspect superiorly, correct the transverse cant in the
        occlusion and correct the curve of Spee.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    d.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    e.  Augmentation genioplasty.

    f.  Bilateral partial nasal turbinectomies.

    <PERSON> septoplasty.

    h.  External rhinoplasty.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
