<PERSON> 06/29/2009

The patient presents for a new consultation. I last saw her in April
2008 and prior to that in 2005. Her maxillary surgery from the last
surgery has done very well. She says that she believes that she had body
image psychosis or a similar term to that where she is fixated on her
appearance and actually she made herself worse by demanding all of her

1.  She would like her cheeks augmented.

2.  She wants her chin shortened vertically.

3.  She wants her mandibular angles augmented.

4.  She wants the roll in her lower lip reduced.

5.  She wants her lower teeth hidden or covered so not so much shows as
    she feels this is what makes her look the most hideous.

I told her I did not to shorten her chin vertically as this would put
her way out of balance because the lower height of the mandible now is
less than normal and her upper lip is slightly longer in length. I did
tell her that we could augment her angles of her mandible, but I was not
in favor of augmenting her cheeks. The prominent roll in her lower lip
could be reduced. The lower lip could be re-suspended to try to get
better elevation and coverage of her lower teeth.

She has an appointment with Dr. <PERSON> tomorrow. She is seeing
him about further lip surgery as he has done quite a bit of work on her
already. She also is going to have a tummy tuck done and breast work
done as well. We can probably do it all at the same time. I will be
approaching her jaws from an extra-oral approach to place the implants
at the angle of the mandible, but at the chin area that will be an
intraoral procedure. I will have to consult with Dr. <PERSON> to see if
he is willing to do the procedures all in one stage. He may prefer to
stage them.

Radiographically, she is doing well. Her sinus appear relatively clear
despite that she has smoked for many years and has had numerous
maxillary osteotomies performed and has huge Interpore 200 block
implants. She says she quit smoking 1-1/2 years ago and is doing well.
She apparently is not clenching like she was before and that was
probably initiated by some of her psychiatric medications that she was
on.


1.  <PERSON> of mandibular angles.

2.  Lower lip ptosis and malposition of mentalis muscles.

3.  Lip incompetence.


1.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.

2.  Construct 3-D model of jaws.

3.  Construct angle implants.

4.  <PERSON> reconstruction of mandibular angles with Medpor implants.

b.  Reconstruct mentalis muscles with transosseous suspension sutures.

c.  Consider filling out roll in lower lip.

These are the procedures that I feel I could help her with. She is to
keep me informed of her progress.
