<PERSON> 04-15-03

Heather is 26 years old. Dr. <PERSON> referred <PERSON>. Also, she is
being seen by her dentist, Dr. <PERSON> in Lufkin, Texas. She also
has seen Dr. <PERSON>, an orthodontist in Longview.

Patient History

joints just started to click and pop. She had a splint made by Dr. <PERSON>
that seemed to help some, but it got stretched out and became
ineffective. Dr. <PERSON> also has made a splint for <PERSON> that
included an upper and lower splint connected by a bar that helped hold
the lower jaw forward. <PERSON> said that when she wore this, she did
sleep a little bit better, and she could breathe a little bit better,
and she felt better, but by 10 o’clock in the morning, all the symptoms
were back again.

Currently, she only takes BC powder for her headaches.

<PERSON> gets headaches that sometimes can last three to four days at a
time. They usually start in the afternoon and get worse through the rest
of the day. Her average headaches are about a level of 5 and involve the
frontal, temporal, and posterior head area, but they can escalate to 8.
She rates her TMJ pain at 8, overall pain at 5 on an average day, jaw
function at 6, diet at 5, and disability at 2.

Patient Concerns

1.  Bilateral loud clicking and popping

2.  TMJ pain

3.  Headaches

4.  Myofascial pain

5.  Speech affected

6.  Difficulty swallowing

7.  Difficulty eating and chewing

8.  Burning sensations around her face, mouth, and ears that get hot

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good facial symmetry and balance.
Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned with
the facial midline. In profile, she has fairly good facial symmetry.
Some slight fullness in the submental area.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the
second molars. She has a nice Class I cuspid-molar relationship.
<PERSON> appears clear, although she does have a bifid uvula.

Intranasally, turbinates are fairly large and look just slightly
inflamed. May be causing some moderate obstruction. When <PERSON> tries
to blow her nose, however, she says that she can’t get air out. It gets
blocked off. She can breather in fairly easily though.

On opening, she has clicks in both joints. Left one appears to click at
about 10 mm of opening; right side may be at 15 mm of opening. Both tend
to click on closing at approximately 10 mm. Interestingly, the click on
the left side is a little bit more prominent on opening, but the click
on the right side is a little bit more prominent on closing. Maxillary
incisal opening is 42 mm but without discomfort only 24 mm. Excursive
movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear
moderately large. Third molars are absent. All other teeth are present.
A 3 x 3 retainer is seen. <PERSON> appear a little bit narrow
anteroposteriorly. Articular eminences appear quite steep, and the left
one appears quite elongated even compared to the right one.

Waters view shows that the right turbinate appears enlarged and blocking
off most of the airway. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the
fossa, and, in fact, clear at the back wall of the fossa. Articular
eminence is quite steep. Superior joint space also is somewhat
decreased. Anterior joint space is increased. Probable vertical
orientation of the articular disc.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the
fossa with slightly decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence
is fairly vertical. Increased anterior joint space indicating probable
vertical orientation of the disc within the joint space.

Open views show good translation of both left and right TMJs.

Cephalometrically, there is a good Class I skeletal jaw relationship.
Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 8 mm and at the
base of the tongue probably about 7 to 8 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with early
    reduction

2.  Relative mandibular hyperplasia

3.  Headaches

4.  TMJ pain

5.  Myofascial pain

6.  Earaches

7.  Tinnitus

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

A.  Align and level maxillary arch

B.  Align and level mandibular arch

2.  Surgery

A.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
    Mitek anchors

B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion and
    create room within the TMJ joints to accommodate the discs

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
