<PERSON> 12-29-03

Jody is 32 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

Patient History

Jody has had multiple TMJ surgeries, approximately 15 from 1991 through
2001. The only medication <PERSON> takes is oxycodone 40 mg b.i.d. This
medication is inadequate to control her pain at this time. She does
receive Botox injections to her muscles about every two months and has
done this since 2001. They apparently inject the masseters, temporalis
muscles, and medial pterygoid muscles.

<PERSON>’s TMJ problems began on 06/19/91 in the military when she sustained
a blunt trauma to the right side of her face that injured the left jaw
joint. She had her first major treatment in 08/1991 when she had some
procedures performed to try to increase her jaw opening. On 10/06/91,
she had a left TMJ arthroplasty and discectomy. On 02/07/92, she had a
left TMJ gap arthroplasty with a dermal graft placed. On 10/07/92, she
had a left TMJ rib graft placed. On 05/26/93, she had bilateral
coronoidectomies and jaw manipulations. On 01/13/93, she had a right TMJ
arthroscopy. On 06/16/93, she had a left TMJ arthroplasty and silastic
spacer. On 07/07/93, she had a right TMJ arthroscopy performed again. In
10/1993, she had multiple procedures to try to increase her jaw opening.
On 11/05/93, she had a left TMJ removal of the silastic spacer and other
hardware. In 07/1998, she had a left TMJ total joint prosthesis placed.
On 11/20/01, she had removal of the left TMJ prosthesis and a dermal
graft placed and coronoidectomies repeated again. On 02/28/02, she had
bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses placed.

Between the time that she had rib graft on 10/07/92 through 06/16/93,
she had almost daily sedation and jaw expansion but still continued to
produce bone and ankylosis.

In addition to the TMJ surgeries, she has also had genioplasty performed
twice to try to align the chin up with the center of her face. She also
had liposuction done to try to decrease the illusion of her jaws
becoming more retruded.

In addition to all the surgical procedures, she has bone through
biofeedback, relaxation therapy, physical therapy, TENS treatment,
<PERSON>, Therapacer, tongue blade therapy, and jaw exercises.

The only other joint area that she has problems with is with her neck.
She may have a component of fibromyalgia. However, the VA Hospital
refutes this as they don’t believe that syndrome exists. She also has
been diagnosed as having chronic fatigue problems. She is also aware of
nocturnal and daytime clenching. <PERSON> states that she has numbness
throughout most of her facial area. She has some sensation but no fine
sensations at all. She basically feels numb throughout the whole facial
area. Has weakness in the frontal branches of the facial nerve, and the
left marginal mandibular branch seems quite a bit weaker than the right
side. She gets migraine headaches but besides those has fairly constant
headaches particularly between the Botox injections. The headaches are
primarily in the temporal and frontal area at about a level of 8. She
rates her TMJ pain on an average day at about a level of 8 and overall
pain around the head and neck area on an average day at about 8. <PERSON>
rates her jaw function at a level of 9, diet at 8, and disability at 7.

<PERSON> does have significant problems sleeping at night.

Patient Concerns

Primary concerns and problems that <PERSON> currently has include the

1.  TMJ pain

2.  Headaches

3.  Malocclusion where the teeth and jaws do not fit together well at
    all

4.  Decreased jaw opening

5.  Ringing in the ears

6.  Neck and shoulder pain

7.  Earaches

8.  Lightheadedness

9.  Dizziness

10. Light sensitivity

11. Hearing loss

12. Eyesight loss on the left side

13. Cardiac arrest x 2 during surgery

14. Speech problems associated with the jaw malalignment

15. Difficulties eating and chewing

16. Inability to have dental work done on her teeth

17. Major disabilities associated with her jaw problems and joint
    problems

18. Depression secondary to all the above

19. Difficulty swallowing, and this has been attributed to the jaws
    becoming more receded

20. Sleep disorder

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial balance in the middle and
upper third face. Some asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip
length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.
She has increased fullness in her cheek on the left side as compared to
the right side. Appears that the angle of the mandible is shifted
probably 5 to 6 mm further off to the left side than the right side.
Maxillary dental midline is shifted about a millimeter off to the left.
Lower incisors are 6 mm off to the left side, so mandibular dental
midline is 6 mm off toward the left side. <PERSON> is probably about 8 mm
off to the left.

In profile view, upper lip supralabrale is probably about 2 to 3 mm
posterior to subnasale. <PERSON> appears to be probably about 4 mm AP
deficient. Mandible may be about 10 mm AP deficient. Chin-neckline is
somewhat short and full. Chin-neck angle is not well-defined.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. Has moderate crowding, lower anterior arch. Has good attached
gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all
of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II,
division II type of malocclusion. When she bites down, she hits only on
her incisors, and the rest of her teeth are all completely out of
occlusion. Transversely, she has a fairly significant cant in the
occlusal plane with the left cuspid being probably 3 to 4 mm elevated
compared to the right cuspid. In the mandible, the vertical difference
of the left cuspid to the right is only about 1 to 2 mm. In occlusion,
she only hits on her maxillary central incisors and mandibular right
central and lateral incisor. <PERSON> has a Class I cuspid occlusion on the
right side but a full Class II cuspid occlusion on the left side.
Mandibular left cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.
Maxillary right cuspid is 1 to 2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. This
contributes a little bit to the AP shift of the occlusion from the left
to the right side. Appears her posterior open bite is about 3 to 4 mm
with it being greater on the left side as compared to the right side.
Does have a full crossbite on the left side.

To palpation, <PERSON> has fairly severe pain to palpation bilaterally in
the temporalis muscles, masseter muscles, medial pterygoid muscles,
TMJs, styloid areas, posterior neck muscles, and moderate pain to
palpation in the SCMs and shoulders. Incisal opening maximally is 18 mm
and without significant pain about 9 mm. She has about a millimeter of
excursive movement in each direction.

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation shows the presence of bilateral TMJ Concepts
total joint prostheses. Vertical height of the ramus on the left side
appears significantly shorter than the right side. She is missing all
four third molars, but the rest of the teeth are present and appear to
be in reasonable condition. Sinuses appear relatively clear, although
there is some interference particularly on the right side where the
x-ray is not quite as clear around the joint prosthesis or the sinus.
Turbinates appear moderate in size. Appears to be heterotopic bone
growing out posterior to the prosthesis on the left side, although it
may have been there before. A lot of bone is absent on the left side in
the ramus area.

Right TMJ tomogram shows the TMJ Concepts prosthesis in position.
Appears to be some fuzziness around it indicative of perhaps heterotopic
bone around the prosthesis. Posterior open bite is seen. There are some
metal clips in the joint. Difficult to identify any other coronoid
process.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that most of the ramus has been removed from the
left side of the mandible. Prosthesis in the fossa appears to be put in
at a little bit of an angle. Open bite can be appreciated on this side.
There are a number of clips inside.

Waters view shows that the left side of the mandible is significantly
shorter vertically than the right side by probably a good 8 to 10 mm at
the angle area. Vertical length of the mandibular component of the
prosthesis on the left side is significantly shorter than the right
side. The left fossa component appears to be set inferiorly parallel to
the cranial base, whereas the fossa component on the left side is angled
down significantly toward the medial side and is probably 6 to 8 mm
lower medially than it is laterally. This may account for some of the
shifting of the mandible off toward the left side. The crossbite is very
evident on the left side. Transverse cant of the occlusion is really
appreciated on this x-ray as well.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the head was tipped upward
and forward when this x-ray was taken. Oropharyngeal airway, however,
looks very good. Inferior border of the mandible at the angle area on
the left side is about 10 mm shorter vertically than the right side. She
does have two bone plates in the chin area. Division II malocclusion can
readily be seen.

Additional radiographic evaluation from radiographs taken by Dr. <PERSON>: Left TMJ AP films shows that the fossa component is placed at
an angle. However, condyle component appears to be sitting a little bit
more toward the medial side of the fossa. Appears to be heterotopic bone
encasing the fossa component and extends down onto the neck of the
prosthesis. Bone appears to fairly well surround the condylar head.
Probable bony ankylosis in this area.

Right TMJ coronal view likewise shows heterotopic bone that appears to
have grown from around the fossa down onto the mandible in the condyle
area. Fossa on this side appears more flat in orientation. Screws on
both sides appear to be intact in this position. In reviewing pictures
of the image of the model, it appears there was no recontouring done in
the fossa area. It could be that the polyethylene is fairly flat on this
side and could be just the metal base that is more angulated. <PERSON> did
have radiation treatment after her last surgery, the day after, to try
to prevent heterotopic bone formation. The first TMJ implants that <PERSON>
had were <PERSON> implants just on the left side, and this was a
metal on metal prosthesis in the left joint.

Patient Objectives


1.  Gain jaw function again

2.  Significantly decrease the pain levels

3.  Regain the facial balance and harmony that she once had

4.  Decrease or hopefully eliminate the headaches

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Multiple previous TMJ surgeries with approximately 14 surgeries on
    the left side and at least 4 on the right side

2.  Bilateral TMJ total joint prostheses with bony ankylosis

3.  Chronic infection, left TMJ prosthesis

4.  AP maxillary deficiency

5.  Transverse vertical maxillary asymmetry

6.  Mandibular AP deficiency

7.  Left mandibular vertical deficiency

8.  Transverse mandibular asymmetry

9.  Mandibular dental midline shifted 6 mm to the left of the maxillary
    dental midline

10. Bilateral posterior crossbites extending from the lateral incisors
    through and including the second molars

11. Class I cuspid relationship on the right side, Class II cuspid
    relationship on the left side

12. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side of the
    maxilla being 3 to 4 mm vertically shorter than the right side

13. <PERSON> shifted 8 mm to the left of the facial midline

14. Possible chronic low-grade infection, left mandibular ramus area

15. Significant iatrogenic loss of the vertical height of the mandibular
    ramus on the left side

16. Severe TMJ pain

17. Severe headaches

18. Severe myofascial pain

19. Earaches

20. Tinnitus

21. Vertigo

22. Severe limitation of incisal opening

23. Occludes only on maxillary central incisors and mandibular right
    central and lateral incisor with all other teeth out of occlusion

24. Sleep disorder

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth
        removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from
        flaring the lower incisors any further forward

2.  Surgery, stage I

    A.  Removal of heterotopic bone around the TMJ prosthesis

    B.  Remove left TMJ prosthesis including mandibular and fossa
        components

3.  IV antibiotics as recommended by Infectious Disease

4.  Consider possible exploration of left joint area to see if tissue
    samples could be taken to identify or rule out localized chronic
    infection

5.  Surgery, stage II

    A.  Left TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prosthesis

    B.  Possible cranial bone grafts to left ramus area

    C.  Right mandibular sagittal split osteotomy

    D.  Removal of bony ankylosis, right TMJ

    E.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies with bone plate stabilization and
        hydroxyapatite grafting

    F.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts

6.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

7.  Long-term IV antibiotics to try to eliminate any potential infection
    that may be present on the right side

  Other Systems

  <PERSON> has problems with the bones in her neck. She gets lot of urinary
  tract infections and has burning sometimes. She has polyuria and
  nocturia. She is aware of spilling proteins. She does have
  difficulties emptying her bladder at times. Her periods are regular,
  and she has excessive pain with them. She probably has fertility
  problems and had difficulties getting pregnant during her first
  marriage. She has one child, age 5. She has been diagnosed with
  endometriosis. She previously has had pelvic inflammatory disease. She
  has had an abnormal Pap smear x 2 that required no treatment. As a
  child, she had pink eye three or four times but no current eye
  symptoms. She has chronic sinus problems. There is no history of
  smoking. She gets earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, and has loss of
  hearing. She gets frequent colds and viruses. She occasionally gets
  recurrent sore throats and hoarseness. She does have some chest pain
  that is due to nerve damage on the right side from a rib graft
  harvest. She has not had bronchitis that is aware of before, but she
  has had pneumonia x 2, once as a child and the other after her third
  surgery. She has problems with nausea and abdominal pain and cramping.
  She is not aware of any STDs. She does have chronic fatigue problems
  and occasionally runs a fever. She has been told that her thyroid is
  inflamed, although the lab tests have come back relatively normal.

  She does have memory loss with the short-term being worse than
  long-term. The only heart problem she is aware of is when she had
  cardiac arrests x 2, but this was associated with deep sedation and
  not related to a general anesthetic. She has not been exposed to any
  birds. She has had cats all of her life but has had only three as each
  lived to be about 18 years of age. One did catch birds. She has had
  dogs all of her life and probably six dogs all together, and these
  have been mainly indoor dogs. For the last six years, she has lived on
  a farm where they have raised cows (an average of 13) and horses x 3.
  She has no other implants except for the TMJ prostheses and the bone
  plates in her chin.
