<PERSON> 04-15-03

John is 33 years old and was referred by Dr. <PERSON>, Dr. <PERSON>, and <PERSON>.

Patient History

He has had previous surgery for tonsil removal, and he has bone spur
removal from his left hip.

<PERSON> has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, myofascial pain,
earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, etc. He did acknowledge his joints function
very smoothly without any problems.

Patient Concerns

1.  Sleep apnea problems

2.  Lower jaw is retruded

3.  Teeth don’t fit together properly

4.  Snoring

5.  Sleep apnea

6.  Restless leg syndrome

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about -1. Maxillary, mandibular, and <PERSON> are all pretty much
aligned on the facial midine. Left side of the mandible appears might be
a little bit vertically short compared to the right side.

In profile, <PERSON> has some AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to
4 mm. Mandible is AP deficient by about 12 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is
shortened and chin-neck angle is not well-defined. Some fullness in the
submental area.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second
molars present. Some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has good
attached gingival around the lower anterior arch. May have a couple of
millimeters of crowding in the lower anterior arch.

In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second
molars. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally and is
Class II by about probably around 3 mm. Overjet is about 2 mm. Overbite
is about 3 to 4 mm. There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane
with the left side being 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right side. Lower
arch is probably about a millimeter of vertical difference to 1.5 mm
between the left and right side. Uvula is moderately large but not
really severe. Posterior faucial pillars appear to be positioned
somewhat posteriorly in the oropharynx.

Intranasally, the right turbinate is moderately large. Left turbinate
appears quite small. Nasal septum at its base appears to reflect over
towards the left side of the nose, but airway is quite large on that
side compared to the opposite side.

TMJs seem to function smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear
moderately large on both sides. <PERSON> appear quite broad
anteroposteriorly but appear fairly well-rounded with just a little
flatness on top of the left one. All four third molars are missing, but
the rest of the teeth are present and accounted for. No restorations
present.

Waters view shows that the right turbinate is quite large compared to
the left one and seems to block a good part of the airway. Sinuses for
the most part appear relatively clear. Left side of the mandible appears
a little bit short vertically compared to the right side.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is quite broad
anteroposteriorly. Seems almost a little bit large for the size of the
fossa but seems to fit in there okay. Articular eminence is fairly steep
although moderately long vertically. Good joint space appears to be
present around the condylar head.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is very broad anteroposteriorly.
Articular eminence is moderately steep and longer on this side as
compared to the opposite side. Joint space appears fairly well balanced
although might be just slightly decreased posteriorly. Contour of the
condylar head looks relatively smooth.

Open views show good translation of the condyles on opening.

Dental model analysis shows that the lower teeth are actually a little
warped from the impression, so there are some inaccuracies in
assessment. Lower teeth appear a little bit flared. There is a
tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of about 1.5 to 2 mm.
Slight reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. Class II end-on
occlusion with an anterior deep-bite relationship.

<PERSON> has been recommended to have a CPAP machine, and he tried the CPAP
machine but was unable to tolerate the device. He currently wears a
two-piece splint device that holds the mandible forward; however, over
time, this is going to play havoc to his dentition.

Based on clinical examination, dental models, radiographs, and sleep

Basic Diagnoses

1.  AP maxillary deficiency

2.  Posterior vertical deficiency

3.  AP mandibular deficiency

4.  High occlusal plane angle

5.  Class II end-on occlusion

6.  Tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of approximately 2
    mm

7.  Slight cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the left side
    being higher than the right side

8.  Snoring

9.  Sleep apnea

10. Restless leg syndrome

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

A.  Align and level maxillary arch

B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth,
    removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to correct for the
    tooth-size discrepancy

2.  Surgery

A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the maxilla
    and level the transverse occlusal plane

B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a
    counterclockwise direction

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

<PERSON> did say that he has been to see Dr. <PERSON> PIn, and because of the
excessive soft tissue in the infraorbital area, Dr. <PERSON> suggested some
augmentations in those areas. This could possibly be done at the same
time if <PERSON> would prefer, and he will let us know what is thoughts are
in that situation. The infraorbital rims appear inferiorly and
posteriorly positioned.
