<PERSON> 04/12/2008

Alan is 14 years and 11 months old. Referred by Dr. <PERSON>. He

1.  Symbicort.

2.  Mometasone.

3.  Desloratadine.


1.  Sinusitis.

2.  Difficulties breathing through his nose.

3.  Difficulties getting the lips together.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth
lip relationship is 10 mm. Maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are
all aligned on the facial midline. In profile view, the maxilla may be
retruded about 4 to 5 mm. <PERSON> is retruded by probably about 10 to 15
mm. <PERSON> neckline is a little bit short, although the chin neck angle is
fairly well defined. <PERSON> has a lip incompetence of about 12 mm. Lower
third facial dimension is excessively long. <PERSON> has had orthodontic
appliances on for approximately 5 years. Intraorally, he has all of his
lower teeth back to the second molars. The teeth are nicely aligned and
leveled. He has some hyperplasia of the gingival tissues, but has good
attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back to the
second molars. He has some hyperplasia of the gingival tissues in the
upper arch as well. He has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship and
has almost 2 mm of vertical overbite. He has no tenderness to palpation
around the head and neck area. Incisal opening is 47 mm. Excursion
movements are about 6 mm in each direction.

Initially, <PERSON> had a slight anterior open bite of maybe about 2 mm.
With the orthodontics, that problem has been corrected. Back in 2003, he
had vertical maxillary excess at that time, and it has gotten somewhat
worse for him. Intranasally, he has got moderately hypertrophied
turbinates. <PERSON> appears relatively straight. There is moderate nasal
airway obstruction. <PERSON> is somewhat wide and nostrils are narrow.
He does report moderate snoring, but no daytime somnolence and no sleep
apnea symptoms.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows that he has got four impacted
third molars. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is relatively straight, but
turbinates are enlarged. He has significant cloudiness in the left
maxillary sinus, but the rest of the sinuses appear relatively clear. He
probably has ongoing sinusitis at this time.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and
fairly good joint space and moderate inclination of the articular
eminence.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and fairly
good joint space with moderate inclination of the articular eminence. On
opening, there is fairly good translation of both condyles.


1.  Severe vertical maxillary excess.

2.  Mandibular prognathism (hidden by the excessive vertical growth of
    the maxilla).

3.  Anterior vertical mandibular excess.

4.  Probable bilateral condylar hyperplasia.

5.  High occlusal plane angle.

6.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

7.  Nasal airway obstruction.

8.  Wide columella.

9.  Impacted third molars x4.

10. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 2 to 3 mm.

11. Over-angulation of lower incisors.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the low anterior
        teeth, removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure to compensate
        for the tooth size discrepancy and to decrease the excessive
        angulation of the lower incisors.

2.  Continue to monitor growth until the patient is 16 years old.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly
        approximately 10 mm.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc
        repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchors if
        condylar hyperplasia confirmed.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition it.

    d.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

    e.  Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to vertically reduce
        and AP augment the chin.

    f.  Bilateral turbinectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
