<PERSON> SUMMERS 5/16/05

Marilyn is 44 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, St. Louis, MO.

She had a hysterectomy in 1989. No other surgeries. She takes the

1.  <PERSON> patch 50 mcg/hr.

2.  Zoloft 100 mg q.d.

3.  Wellbutrin XL 150 mg b.i.d.

4.  Tylenol ES p.r.n.

5.  Motrin p.r.n.

She does have a history of anemia in the past but has currently no
problems with that. She has not had problems with anemia since her
hysterectomy. Prior to her hysterectomy, she had bleeding problems that
created that situation. <PERSON>'s problems began on April 19, 2004. She
was a nurse in the Developmental Center and a patient residing there
attacked <PERSON> and hit her with some metal medical cases and threw her
on the ground and kicked her. She had a lot of generalized bruising and
cuts but the main injury was to her jaw that was dislocated during the
altercation. She had to wait until she was off work to go see the
Workers' Compensation doctor. This doctor looked <PERSON> over and sent
her home on Darvocet. About a week later, Dr. <PERSON> was the
Workers' Compensation doctor who then referred her to Dr. <PERSON>.

Dr. <PERSON> made an appliance to try to recapture the disc on the left
side. This was ineffective, but he did work for 3 to 4 months trying to
recapture the disc. Dr. <PERSON> referred <PERSON> to Dr. <PERSON>.
The Workers' Compensation referred her to Dr. <PERSON> in St. Louis who
performed an arthrogram. Apparently the arthrogram showed that she had a
displaced disc on the left side with a perforation. Dr. <PERSON> also made
a splint for <PERSON> but has been unable to get <PERSON> comfortable.

<PERSON> gets earaches on the left side greater than the right side,
bilateral tinnitus, and vertigo and hearing loss on the left side. Other
joints that bother her include her hips, right elbow, knees with the
left being worse than the right one. She says her left ear feels full
all the time. She has no known allergies. She is aware of clenching
daytime and nighttime. <PERSON> has had to do some significant changes in
her lifestyle since injury and is no longer able to work, drive and must
eat a soft diet. She has gained approximately 50 pounds since the
injury. She has constant headaches that function at an average of 7
involving the frontal, temporal and posterior head area. They frequently
escalate to a level of 10. Her headaches are worse in the mornings when
she wakes up then may get worse after that. Her average daily level of
pain and headaches is a level 7. She rates her jaw function and diet at
7, disability at 8. She gets tingling throughout the facial area and jaw
area. She also gets tingling and numbness in her hands.

In frontal view, it appears that <PERSON>'s maxillary midline is pretty
much on the facial midline. She tends to posture the mandible
significantly off to the right side so that midlines are off by probably
about 5 to 6 mm. She has a crossbite on the right side and buccal
crossbite on the left side due posture of the mandible. She has
significant muscle spasms. It is very difficult to do a intraoral
evaluation, but the uvula appear to be relatively normal and the soft
tissues appear to be relatively healthy in the oropharyngeal areas as
best as I can tell.

<PERSON> SUMMERS 5/16/05 Page 2

The soft palate looks relatively normal in length and faucial pillars
appear relatively normal. Intranasally, turbinates appear to be
relatively normal in size. However, the nasal septum deviates severely
off toward the left side and appears to obliterate that nasal airway.
She does have severe snoring problems. She has to sleep propped up. She
will wake up at night sometimes due to the snoring and often times
secondary to pain. She does not sleep very well at night. She has severe
daytime somnolence. It is rather difficult to determine the occlusal
relationship because of the severe posturing of the mandible off towards
the right side. She is a slight Class III on the left side with the
splint in place and the midlines line up quite a bit better with the
lower midline being only about a mm off to the right at the maxillary
midline. She is a little bit Class III on the left side as well with the
splint in place. Her mouth is propped open with the splint. The splint
fits from the bicuspids posteriorly and the anterior six teeth are out
of the splint. With the splint in place she has about 3 to 4 mm anterior
open-bite. <PERSON> has an incisal opening of about 10 mm. Excursion
movement to the right as best as I can estimate would be around a 6, to
the left she probably has 0 abilities to shift in that direction. To
palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain in the masseters, medial
pterygoids, styloid areas, SCMs and left TMJ. She has moderate pain to
palpation in the temporalis muscles, shoulders, and right TMJ.


Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. She appears to have
all of her mandibular teeth back through the second molars. In the upper
arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except on
the left side she is missing maxillary left first molar. All four third
molars are absent. Sinuses look reasonably clear as best as they can be
seen. She appears to have some arthritic changes in both joints, but
again difficult to tell.

Waters view show that the bony septum deviates a little bit off to the
left side posteriorly. However, the posterior septum cannot be seen.
Turbinates appear moderate in size. Sinuses appear relatively clear.
Left maxillary sinus appears significantly smaller then the right
maxillary sinus. Ethmoids and frontal sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured significantly forward
in the fossa. Articular eminence is very shallow but elongated. <PERSON>
shows a little sclerosis in the head of the condyle and there appears to
be anterior beaking present. The condyle is postured probably a good 4
mm anterior in the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is positioned superiorly and
posteriorly in the fossa with what appears to be significantly decreased
joint space. Articular eminence is somewhat shallow but steeper than the
opposite side. The condyle appears a little sclerotic. Opening view
shows virtually no movement and very constricted opening if any at all.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a Class III skeletal and occlusal
relationship. The left condyle is postured significantly forward
compared to the right side. Oropharyngeal airway appears good. Occlusal
plane appears relatively normal in angulation. Sinuses do appear to be
over-angulated particularly at the lower anteriors.

<PERSON> SUMMERS 5/16/05 Page 3

Arthrogram of left TMJ indicates the condyle is anteriorly positioned in
the fossa significantly and there is a subluxated disc as well as a
perforation. The date of the arthrogram was January 6, 2005. The
ordering physician was Dr. <PERSON>.

MRI evaluation show that she has anteriorly displaced articular disc
without reduction and limited mouth opening bilaterally. Arthritic
changes with mild spurring on the anterior aspect of the condyle was
noted bilaterally as well. The MRI was done May 21, 2004.


1.  Bilateral TMJ advanced arthritis and articular disc dislocations
    with severe deformation and nonsalvageable.

2.  Mandibular deviated prognathism (primarily due to severe muscle
    splinting.)

3.  Severe TMJ pain.

4.  Severe headaches.

5.  Severe myofascial pain.

6.  Class III nonocclusion in part due to splint therapy.

7.  Missing maxillary left first molar.

8.  Severely limited incisal opening (10 mm.)

9.  Severe emasculatory dysfunction.

10. Daytime and nocturnal clenching.


1.  Medications.

    a.  Klonopin 1 mg tablets 1 tablet q.h.s. to try to decrease
        nocturnal clenching.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

4.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
        prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fatgrafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

  6. Restorative dentistry to replace the missing maxillary left first
  molar.
