<PERSON> 10/02/2006

<PERSON> is 40 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON> and also Dr.
<PERSON>. <PERSON>'s primary concern is severe sleep apnea. He is
currently on a CPAP machine and has had different CPAP machines and also
different masks to try to help his situation. <PERSON> has to sleep on his
stomach and it makes it difficult to keep the CPAP mask in position.


1.  <PERSON> insulin.

2.  Effexor 225 mg.

3.  Concerta 36/72 mg.

He does have type I diabetes. <PERSON> is not aware of having any TMJ
problems. He tends to breathe through his mouth when he sleeps. He has
severe snoring. He has mild daytime tiredness now. He believes his sleep
apnea began sometime in the summer of 2000. His sleep apnea has been
diagnosed as severe. He does wake up at night frequently unable to catch
his breath. He has moderate jerking of his arms and legs at night.

<PERSON> has already had surgical procedures including correction of the
deviated nasal septum and also reduction of his turbinates. <PERSON> has
been on orthodontic appliances now for about 16 months. He has already
seen three other doctors in reference to his situation.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 28 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
almost 4 mm. Maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to the left side.
Mandibular dental midline may be a little bit closer to being on the
midline as is the chin. Chin-neckline is very short and not well
defined. <PERSON> has a head postured forward neck position. <PERSON> appears
to be maybe 3 to 4 mm AP deficient and the <PERSON> appears to be about 15
mm AP positioned. As <PERSON> postures his mandible forward as far as he can
which is probably about 7 mm at the chin area, it does improve his
overall facial profile. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back
through the second molars present. It appears slight accentuated curve
of <PERSON> is present in the lower arch. In the upper arch he has a reverse
curve of <PERSON> with the upper anterior 6 teeth being significantly lower
than the posterior teeth. He has all of his upper teeth present. He has
an end-on Class II cuspid relationship on the right side and just a
slight Class II cuspid relationship on the left side by probably about
10 mm but on the right side he his closer to 4 or 5 mm Class II. The
lower arch is fairly symmetric. In the upper arch, the left cuspid is
probably 2 to 3 mm posterior to the right cuspid. Transversely, the
occlusal plane is fairly level. Intraorally, his uvula is moderately
elongated but not too significant. The soft palate is somewhat
elongated. The faucial pillars are quite constricted and may be a major
contributing factor to his sleep apnea. The tongue appears relatively
large compared to the size of the oral cavity. Intranasally, <PERSON> has
had previous turbinectomies and he has had a septoplasty. The septum is
still deviated off towards the left side and he does have a little
septal spur at the base of the septum. For the most part his nose is
pretty open particularly on the right side. It is wide open all the way
back. He does have some constricture of the luminal valves a little bit
more so on the left side than the right side.

MIKE TOBASH 10/02/2006 Page 2

Holding those opening he can breathe a little bit easier but it did not
make a significant difference. He does have anterior deep bite of
probably about 8 mm. TMJs function smoothly. <PERSON> does not have any
complaints about TMJ problems.


Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars but all the rest of the
teeth are present. He has reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch and an
accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch. Sinuses look clear. The
condyles look large but no evidence of any pathology.

Waters view shows that the bony septum at least appears fairly straight
and the turbinates particularly on the right side appears relatively
small and on the left side there could be a little bit of enlargement
and perhaps some slight decreased airway space on that side but
difficult to tell. Sinuses look relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a little bit of a hockey
stick shape to it but there appears to be good joint space surrounding
it.

Left TMJ images are hard to decipher. On one view where it can be
somewhat seen seems to be in reasonably good position with a little bit
of a hockey stick shape to it but reasonable joint space. The other view
is unreadable. On opening, there appears to be good translation of both
condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a skeletal Class II
jaw relationship. There is decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 4 mm
at the soft palate level and probably 5 mm at the base of the tongue.
The soft palate appears elongated. The tongue actually is assuming a low
position in the mouth with probably almost 15 mm of space between the
dorsum of the tongue and the palate. However, the tongue is postured
posteriorly in the oropharynx. Tooth size analysis shows that there is
only about ½ mm difference. However, hand manipulating the models shows
that there appears to be probably maybe 1 to 2 mm tooth size difference.
It may have been to due with the fact that the teeth may be just a
little bit wider anteroposteriorly and somewhere particularly below the
anterior teeth. <PERSON> believes that he does have nocturnal clenching and
bruxism.


1.  AP maxillary deficiency.

2.  Vertical maxillary deficiency.

3.  AP mandibular deficiency.

4.  Hyperplastic soft palate.

5.  Severe constricture of faucial pillars.

6.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.

7.  Severe sleep apnea.

8.  Severe snoring.

MIKE TOBASH 10/02/2006 Page 3


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Be sure there is
        adequate space between the upper laterals and cuspids to make
        room for interdental osteotomies. Consider placing a step in the
        upper arch wire so that the cuspid will be aligned a little bit
        better with the posterior teeth and the laterals and cuspids
        aligned at a slightly lower occlusal plane.

    b.  Continue to align and level the mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward
        about 4 mm and down graft it about 3 to 4 mm posteriorly and 2
        mm anteriorly.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a slight counterclockwise direction approximately 12 mm.

    c.  Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) with lateral inversion flaps.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

I did review with him all the various aspects about the surgery
including the risks and potential complications and he understands. I
answered all the questions he had today.

I gave him a prescription for Lortab 5, dispensing 20 tablets 1 tablet
q.4h. p.r.n., no refills.
