<PERSON> 04/29/2008

<PERSON> is 16 years old. Referred by Dr. <PERSON>. She has had her
tonsils removed. She otherwise is in good health with no major medical

1.  <PERSON>.

2.  Extended nose.

3.  Difficulties breathing through the nose.

4.  Headaches.

5.  Soreness in the jaw joints.

<PERSON> gets headaches at about a level of 4 in the temporal areas about
two times per week. She does not have any pain directly in her TMJs,
although she says sometimes they do get sore. On an average day, she
gets a pain level of about 4 and it appears to be mainly in the jaw
area. She rates her jaw function at 8, diet at 2, disability at 3. She
has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. The
other joints that bother her include her hips and her back, but she is a
cheerleader and a flyer. She is not aware of clenching. The patient
reports that she has had multiple traumas to her nose. She does have
pain along the lateral aspect of the nose perhaps as a result of recent
injury. The nose is extremely wide at the base of the nasal bones and is
deviated off to the right side approximately 2 mm. She has significant
difficulties breathing through her nose and is basically a mouth
breather.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> appears to have fairly
good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm.
Upper tooth lip relationship is about 4.5 mm. The maxillary and
mandibular incisors are pretty much aligned with each other, and, with
the facial midline, the nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side
about 10 mm. <PERSON> is fairly close to being on the facial midline, but
maybe just slightly to the right 1 to 2 mm. In profile view, the upper
lip is probably 6 to 8 mm AP deficient. <PERSON> is retruded by probably 18
to 20 mm. <PERSON> neckline is short and chin neck angle is reasonably well
defined. Lower third face appears elongated. Lip incompetence measures
about 6 mm. <PERSON> has an obtuse nasolabial angle and upper lip
supralabrale is about 3 mm posterior to subnasally. Intraorally, <PERSON>
has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. The teeth
appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the
lower anteriors. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back
through the second molars. <PERSON> has basically a Class I cuspid molar
relationship. She has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm. She appears
to have just a slight cant in the occlusion with the right side being
maybe 1 mm lower than the left side. To palpation, <PERSON> has no
tenderness around the head and neck area except around the TMJs at about
2 1/2 to 3 and in the styloid areas about 1 1/2 to 2. On opening, she
may have a very soft click at about 25-30 mm. It is difficult to
identify an overt click however. Her oropharyngeal tissues look normal.
Turbinates are fairly good size. The septum is deviated a little bit off
towards the right side. The right turbinate appears to touch against the
septum. Both turbinates appear to create a fair amount of airway
blockage. The columella is wide and nostrils are narrow. Luminal valves
are somewhat constricted. <PERSON> does not complain of snoring problems,
but she does have mild to moderate daytime somnolence. She is not aware
of any sleep apnea situation. Incisal opening is 54 mm. Excursion
movement is to about 8 mm in each direction.

<PERSON> had orthodontic treatment from the age of 10 to 14 by Dr.
Pickering.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of four developing
but unerupted third molars. She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch
and a 1-to-1 retainer in the upper arch. Sinuses appear clear.

Waters view shows that there is some deviation in the bony nasal septum
with a little bit of spurring off to the left side. Turbinates appear
large, particularly on the right side which seems to obliterate the
airway on that side. Sinuses appear clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has good morphology. There is a
little flattening on the anterior aspect. There appears to be decreased
joint space vertically and posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately
steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little sclerotic on top
with a decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence
is moderately steep. Anterior joint space is somewhat increased. On
opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a head postured
forward neck position. She has an AP maxillary deficiency and anterior
vertical maxillary deficiency. She has an AP mandibular deficiency.
Oropharyngeal airway actually looks quite good considering the jaw
position. The oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level is about 14
mm and at the base of the tongue is about 7 mm.


1.  Rule out TMJ articular disc dislocations.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

5.  AP mandibular deficiency.

6.  AP microgenia.

7.  Slight Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I on the
    left side.

8.  Anterior open bite.

9.  Impacted third molars x4.

10. High occlusal plane angle.

11. Hypertrophied turbinates.

12. External nasal deformity.


1.  MRI of left and right TMJ.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
        osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors, if disc displacement is confirmed by MRI.

    b.  Maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect superiorly,
        posterior aspect inferiorly to decrease occlusal plane and to
        advance it forward..

    c.  Bilateral mandibular osteotomies to advance the mandible in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    d.  Augmentation genioplasty.

    e.  Reduction turbinectomies.

    f.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

    g.  External rhinoplasty.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
