KRISTEN TREST 07/03/2008

The patient is referred by Dr. <PERSON>. She is 46 years old and
suffers from depression. She had ovarian cysts removed last year.

Her TMJ problems began in approximately 2002 when she was 40 years old
been under splint therapy for 6 years. She had a gingivoplasty in 1993
and then she had orthodontics when she was a teenager with removal of
all four second bicuspids and all four third molars. Primary concerns

1.  Clicking and popping noise constantly in her jaws with any kind of
    jaw function.

2.  TMJ pain.

3.  Clicking and popping in the jaw joints when she eats or talks.

4.  Snoring.

5.  Daytime tiredness.

6.  Restless leg syndrome.

<PERSON> does not have any significant problems with headaches. She rates
her TMJ average daily pain at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function
at 1, diet at 0, and disability at 1.


1.  Doxycycline 100 mg q.d.

2.  Spironolactone 50 mg q.d.

3.  Terbinafine 50 mg.

4.  Lexapro 10 mg q.d.

She has no problems with headaches, but gets tinnitus and has mild
vertigo difficulties. The other joints that bother her include her lower
back, but she is not aware of any other significant joint problems. She
does have restless leg syndrome. She does clench and brux her teeth at
night and she may do that some during the day as well.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm. In profile view, she may have just
some slight AP maxillary deficiency, but not too much. The mandible
appears a little bit retruded. <PERSON> neckline and chin neck angle are not
well defined. The mandible is retruded probably about 8 to 10 mm
possibly. As <PERSON> postures her lower jaw forward and the upper lip is
filled out slightly, it improves her overall facial balance.
Intraorally, <PERSON> appears to be missing mandibular second bicuspids
and also maxillary second bicuspids. There is a Class I cuspid molar
relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of almost 3 mm.
Oropharyngeal tissues appear relatively normal except the soft palate
may be a bit elongated. The fascial pillars may be just mild to
moderately constricted. Tonsils look relatively normal. Intranasally,
she has fairly good size nasal turbinates. Airway appears a little bit
constricted. The septum appears relatively normal. To palpation, she has
no tenderness around the head and neck area. On opening, she has a very
early click in the left joint at about 5 mm and a closing click at about
the same. On the right side, she has an opening click at about 10 mm and
a closing click at about 5 mm. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm.
Excursion movements are about 9 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four second
bicuspids and all four third molars. Sinuses look reasonably clear. The
condyle looks to have reasonably good formation.

Waters view shows that the septum is reasonably straight. She has
enlarged turbinates that seem to block most of the airway. The sinuses
appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is actually postured forward. Her
teeth are not together and are apart so the tomogram is meaningless
relative to disc and condyle position. The condyle is actually postured
a little bit forward in the fossa. The articular eminence is moderately
steep.

On the right side, the teeth are together. This shows that the condyle
may be a little bit posteriorly positioned. The anterior head of the
condyle is a little bit flat with some slight anterior beaking. Joint
space may be a little bit decreased superiorly and posteriorly. On
opening, there is moderately good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class I skeletal
and occlusal relationship. It appears the oropharyngeal airway may be
decreased. She has a skeletal and occlusal Class I cuspid position.


1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early
    reduction.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  AP mandibular deficiency.

4.  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).

5.  Pain.

6.  Sleep apnea symptoms.

7.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

8.  Partial nasal airway obstruction.

9.  Missing all four second bicuspids and all four third molars.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward
          and down graft it slightly posteriorly.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a slight counterclockwise direction.

    d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
