DANIELLE <PERSON> 11-18-04

Danielle is 31 years old.

Patient History

Her TMJ problems began about 5 years ago when she developed clicking and
would lock open, unable to close. She had a lot of clicking and popping
in her jaw joints. She has had splint therapy now for two years. She has
had a lot of physical therapy as well as chiropractic treatment
performed.

She has problems with earaches but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing
loss. The only other joint that really bothers her is her left knee. She
does have some bulging cervical discs but no associated symptomatology.
She is not aware of clenching or bruxism. She gets headaches at a level
of 5 in the temporalis and posterior head area. Her daily TMJ pain is at
about a level of 7, and it is constant with it being worse on the right
side than the left side, although the left side has increased
significantly lately in its intensity. The average facial pain is at a
level of 9, jaw function on an average day is at 7, but it at times gets
to 9. Diet is 9 and disability is at 8.

Patient Concerns

1.  Constant fairly severe TMJ pain

2.  Headaches

3.  Severe myofascial pain

4.  Facial muscle twitching

5.  Throbbing pain through the head and neck area

6.  Cannot talk and has actually had to change her job to help decrease
    the amount of talking that she does

7.  She cannot sing, and she uses to love to sing

8.  Extreme difficulties eating

9.  Difficulties breathing through her nose

10. Snoring problems

11. Earaches

Current Medications

1.  Robaxin 750 mg q.i.d.

2.  Tylenol p.r.n. pain

3.  Ibuprofen p.r.n. pain

4.  Aleve p.r.n. pain

Clinical Examination

Incisal opening is 29 mm, and she feels that she has no side-to-side
movement. To her self palpation, she has rather high moderate to low
severe pain over the masseter muscles and TMJs and moderate pain over
the posterior neck muscles and temporalis muscles. Looking at her
occlusion, she appears that she has bilateral posterior open bites.

Basic Diagnoses

Based on radiographic, dental model, and MRI (poor quality) evaluations,

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without
    reduction

2.  Bilateral posterior open bite

3.  Headaches

4.  TMJ pain

5.  Myofascial pain

Recommended Treatment

1.  MRI of left and right TMJ but high quality and including sagittal
    and coronal views

2.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch

3.  Surgery

    A.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to improve occlusion and
        make room within the joint spaces to accommodate the discs

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

<PERSON> understands that if the discs are not salvageable based on the
new MRI that she may need disc replacement or total joint prostheses.
She very much wants to have the surgery done before the end of the year
if possible.
