<PERSON> 3/25/05

Tonya is 29 years old and is referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

<PERSON> is in good health. The only previous surgery she had was removal
of her tonsils. She has been diagnosed with sleep apnea and recently has
received a CPAP machine. <PERSON> believes that her jaw joint problems have
etiology. She had orthodontics from the age of 12 to 16 where 4 first
bicuspids were extracted. Second round of orthodontics was at age 21 for
about 8 months to try to align some of the anterior teeth. Third ortho
treatment began in August of 2003 by Dr. <PERSON>.


1.  Birth control pills.

2.  Ibuprofen.

3.  Tylenol.

4.  Excedrin Migraine.

5.  Tylenol PM.


1.  Headaches.

2.  Pain in the jaw joints.

3.  Clicking and popping in the jaw joints.

4.  Sleep apnea.

5.  Difficulty eating and chewing.

6.  Difficulty breathing through the nose.

7.  Prominent mouth breather.

She has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo, but has a mild
hereditary hearing loss. The only other joints that bother her are her
hips and she has to have them manipulated and pulled occasionally to
help get some relief. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing. She is
predominately a mouth breather. She gets nightly headaches and
frequently wakes up with them as well. Her headaches occur in the
frontal and temple areas at about a level of 6 on the average. TMJ pain
used to run about at a level of 8 to 9 until November of last year when
Dr. <PERSON> began advancing some of her teeth forward a little bit and this
took some pressure off her joints apparently and so her pain now average
is about a level 4. Her average daily pain is at 6. Jaw function, diet
and disability at 3.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. A
little bit more fullness in the right masseter muscle areas compared to
the left side. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip
relationship is 8 mm. Dental and <PERSON> are all pretty much on
the facial midline. In profile view, the maxilla is 4 to 6 mm in AP
deficient. <PERSON> is approximately 25 mm in AP deficient. Chin-neckline
and chin-neck angle are essentially nonexistent. <PERSON> has a lip
incompetency of about 12 mm. Intraorally, <PERSON> is missing maxillary
mandibular first bicuspids. There is good attached gingiva around the
lower anterior teeth, although she has a slightly high labial frenulum.
She has slightly Class II on the cuspid area, but not too significant.

<PERSON> 3/25/05 Page 2

A little bit more so on the left side than the right side by probably
about 2 to 3 mm. She has about a 1/2 mm overbite relationship.
<PERSON> appears clear with the uvula appearing normal. Soft palate is
positioned low and has some moderate increased length. Fascial pillars
are nearly mildly constricted. Intranasally, she has a little bit of
redundant tissue on the floor of the nose bilaterally. Turbinates are
significantly enlarged and appear inflamed. She has a decreased
functional nasal airway. However, the columella and nostrils appear
relatively normal as well as do the luminal valves. Maximal incisal
opening is 45 mm, but only 18 without significant discomfort. Excursion
movements are about 7 mm in each direction. On opening, she has an
audible click at 25 mm on the left side and 35 mm on the right side and
closing click of 15 mm on the left side and 20 mm on the right side. To
palpation, she has severe pain over the styloid areas. TMJs and masseter
muscles with moderate discomfort over the SCMs and mild tenderness over
the temporalis area.


Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first
bicuspids. I cannot adequately evaluate the sinuses nor the nasal
airway. <PERSON>, particularly the right, show some arthritic changes
with some flattening on the anterior head of the condyle.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good formation.
Decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence is
moderately steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some flattening on the anterior
head and a little bit of anterior beaking present. Articular eminence is
moderately steep. There is some decreased superior joint space, but not
quite as significant as the opposite side. On opening, there is good
translation of both joints with somewhat better translation of the right
side as compared to the left side.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderately
enlarged particularly on the left side. Significant deviation of the
nasal septum and it appears there is a large septal spur projecting off
into the left side of the nose.

Lateral cephalometric view shows a very high-occlusal plane anterior.
There is anterior maxillary vertical excess, anterior vertical
mandibular excess and significant Class II skeletal relationship, but
just a slight Class II occlusal relationship. Lower incisors appear
over-angulated. Oropharyngeal airway is extremely constricted with a
dimension of 2 mm at the soft palate level and less than 2 mm at the
base of the tongue (normal dimension is 11 mm)


1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with late
    reductions.

2.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  AP maxillary deficiency.

5.  Severe AP mandibular deficiency.

<PERSON> 3/25/05 Page 3

6.  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.

7.  Severe sleep apnea.

8.  TMJ pain.

9.  Headaches.

10. Myofascial pain.

11. Slight Class II nonocclusion.

12. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 2 to 3 mm.

13. Masticatory dysfunction.

14. Hypertrophied turbinates.

15. Possible nasal septal deviation and spurring.

16. Nasal airway obstruction.

17. High-occlusal plan angulation.

18. Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.

19. Significant lip incompetence of 12 mm.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level the maxillary arch. Open a little bit of space
        between the upper lateral incisors and cuspids to equal about
        1/2 to 1 mm on each side.

    b.  Continue to align and level the mandibular arch. Slenderize the
        anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and
        retract closing all the spacing.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect of
        the maxilla superiorly and posterior aspect inferiorly as well
        as level the occlusal plane angle.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction.

    d.  Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy to shorten the vertical
        height of the chin.

    e.  HTR implant to the anterior mandible of 6 mm to augment the
        chin.

    f.  Bilateral partial turbinectomies.

    g.  Possible nasoseptoplasty.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
