JAKE VINES 05/17/2011

Jake is 20 years old, birth date 07/30/1990. Referred by some former
patients. <PERSON> is in good health with no major medical problems. He

1.  Clicking in the jaws.

2.  Sore muscles.

3.  Occasional locking of the jaw.

4.  Sore mouth.

5.  Occasional headaches.

6.  Tiredness of the jaws.

<PERSON>’s jaw problems began when he was about 19. At the age of 19, he did
get hit in the jaw on the right side and since then has had some
clicking in his jaw joints. To date, <PERSON> has had no treatment for his
jaw situation. <PERSON> gets headaches once or twice a week at about a level
of 4 in the temple and back of the head. <PERSON> has had 3 major headaches
in the past month where he wakes up with the headaches in the morning.
<PERSON> is aware of clenching his teeth at nighttime. He rates his TMJ pain
at 4, average daily pain is at about level of 7 and predominantly in the
masseter muscle areas. He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 0,
disability at 2. He has no trouble with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo nor
hearing loss. Other joints that bother him include his knees. He takes
no medications.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial balance in the middle and
upper third face. There is some slight asymmetry in the mandible. Upper
lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm.
The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm off to the left side. The
chin is probably about 3 mm off to the left. In profile view, <PERSON> has
some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 3 to 4 mm. He may be
just slightly AP prominent by a couple of millimeters. <PERSON> does have
about 5 mm of lip incompetence. The chin neckline and chin neck angle
are well defined. He has a high mandibular occlusal plane angle facial
morphology. Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through
the second molars erupted in. He has some mild crowding of the lower
anterior arch and some lingual inclination of the lower incisors. He has
good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he has got all of his teeth
back through the second molars. <PERSON> has a full Class III occlusal
relationship bilaterally, being just slightly greater on the right side
than the left side. He has got an anterior cross bite a full posterior
cross bite on the left side and an end-on relationship on the right
side. The maxilla has a little bit of a transverse collapse on the left
side with it being a little bit more narrow on that side compared to the
right side. The mandibular posterior teeth may be rotated just a little
bit to the left side a couple of millimeters. He has a zero vertical
over bite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy, but he does
have moderately enlarged tonsils and a mildly enlarge uvula.
Intranasally, turbinates appear mild to moderate in size. He has had
some sinusitis problems, and, in fact, his x-rays which were taken on
May 10 show that the left sinus was totally obliterated with fluid. To
palpation, <PERSON> has no significant tenderness around the head and neck
area. On opening, he has a very soft pop in the right joint at probably
about 20 mm and a closing pop at about 10. The left side seems to
function relatively smoothly. The maximal incisal opening is 61 mm and
excursion movements are 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. Turbinates appear moderate in size, but the bony septum appears
reasonably straight. He has a Class III cuspid-molar relationship. He
has a root canal in the maxillary right first molar. The condylar head
and necks appear somewhat elongated.

Coronal radiograph shows that he has complete obliteration of his left
maxillary sinus and it is completely full of fluids and/or mucous. The
right turbinate is quite large, although the left one is relatively
normal in size. The right turbinate appears to be causing some
obstruction in that side of the nasal airway. The septum is reasonably
straight. The maxillary right sinus looks normal and healthy.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has reasonably morphology.
There is decreased joint space superior and posteriorly. The articular
eminence is relatively shallow.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and
actually healthier looking than the opposite side. The joint space is
decreased superior and posterior. The articular eminence is relatively
shallow.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral
width. The lateral pole is lower than the medial pole. There is
decreased vertical joint space. The condyle appears a little bit long
vertically. The lateral rim curves inferiorly about 2 to 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle where the lateral pole is lower
than the medial pole. Vertical joint space is less than normal. The
condyle appears to have good mediolateral width. There is significant
decreased joint space vertically. The lateral rim curves inferiorly
about 3 to 4 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class III and occlusal
Class III relationship. Cephalometric analysis shows that
cephalometrically he has a Class III skeletal occlusal relationship.
Oropharyngeal airway looks good.


1.  Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia with displaced articular
    discs.

2.  Mandibular deviated prognathism.

3.  Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.

4.  Class III occlusion.

5.  Anterior and bilateral posterior cross bite with the cross bite
    being worse on the left side.

6.  Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.

7.  Headaches.

8.  Myofascial pain.

9.  TMJ pain.


1. Presurgical orthodontics.

a. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially
and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.

b. Align and level mandibular arch.

2. Surgery.

a. Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning
and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.

b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on
the facial midline and reposition it posteriorly.

c. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and expand.

d. Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
