<PERSON> 05/17/2006

<PERSON> is 30 years old, born on September 6, 1975. He was referred by Dr.
<PERSON>.


1.  Lower jaw is severely retruded.

2.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

3.  Teeth and jaws are severely malaligned.

4.  Snoring.

5.  Difficulty breathing through the nose.

<PERSON> is not aware of when his problem began or how it began. He had
previous orthodontics in his early and mid teens. He had his wisdom
teeth removed when he was 16. He currently is on no medications. He has
no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss. No other
joints bother him. He has no known allergies. He is not aware of
clenching and bruxing at nighttime or in the daytime.

He has no problems with headaches. He has some mild TMJ pain and
myofascial pain. He rates his jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability
at 3. Incisal opening is 56 mm. Excursive movements are 10 mm to the
right and 7 mm to the left. He has a super Class II malocclusion almost
14 mm. He has a 2.5 mm vertical overbite relationship. In a Class I
position he has bilateral posterior crossbites. To palpation he has no
tenderness around the head and neck area.

Clinical examination shows that he has an upper lip length at 22 mm and
a tooth-to-lip relationship of 3 mm. Nasal tip is deviated 2 mm off to
the left side. In profile view, the maxilla is retruded 3 to 4 mm and
the chin is retruded 25 mm. Intraorally, he has the super Class II
occlusion and the 2.5 mm vertical overbite but an overjet of about 11
mm. The uvula is mildly enlarged and the soft palate is moderately
elongated. Faucial pillars are moderately constricted. The tonsils are
mild to moderately enlarged. Intranasally, the turbinates are mildly
enlarged. He has a spur off to the life side of the nasal septum and
also the septum is deviated or bowed out towards the right side. He has
mild nasal airway obstruction. He has some constricture of the luminal
valve on the right side. He does report mild snoring but no daytime
somnolence and no sleep apnea problems. His joints actually seem to
function relatively smoothly. However, the MRI does confirm that he does
have anteriorly displaced articular disc with severe deformation and
also has lost significant condylar volume in both joints. Tooth size
analysis demonstrates a <PERSON>’s difference of 2 mm.


1.  Bilateral TMJ idiopathic condylar resorption.

2.  Severe mandibular hypoplasia.

3.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  Double Class II malocclusion.

6.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

7.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

8.  Significant crowding of lower anterior arch.

<PERSON> 05/17/2006 Page 2

9.  Decreased curve of Wilson in the upper arch.

10. High occlusal plane angle.

11. Decreased oral pharyngeal airway.

12. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 2 mm.

13. Snoring.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Extract mandibular first bicuspids.

    b.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    c.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down
        graft it posteriorly.

    c.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    d.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
