<PERSON> 08-23-04

<PERSON> is 47 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 825 Meadows
Drive, <PERSON>, Ste. 121, Boca Raton, FL 33486.

Patient History

He has had previous gallbladder surgery. She has had his tonsils
removed, and he has had a UPPP procedure. He has had nasoseptoplasty
performed twice. He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo.
He does have some problems with a disintegrating disc at L5-L5. Left
knee also is arthritic. He takes Clarinex 1 to 5 mg p.r.n. He was aware
of having sleep apnea problems as early as the age of 12 to 14.
Treatments to date have included in December of 1989 a UPPP procedure.
In 2000 to 2003, he wore a TAP appliance, but this caused significant
shifting and changing in his teeth to the point that he now has a
malocclusion associated with it. Has no problem with headaches. No TMJ
pain. No pain around the head and neck area. Rates his jaw function and
diet at 5.

Patient Concerns

1.  Sleep apnea

2.  Snoring

3.  Teeth don’t fit together

4.  Bites the sides of the cheeks

5.  Predominantly a mouth breather

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length is 30 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 1 mm.
Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left of the
maxillary midline and facial midline. <PERSON> is about a millimeter off to
the left.

In profile view, he has some maxillary AP deficiency of probably about 3
to 4 mm. <PERSON> is retruded by approximately 20 mm. Chin-neckline is
fairly long, although chin-neck angle is not well-defined. He has a head
postured forward chin position.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second
molars. Slight asymmetry in the lower arch with the left cuspid a
millimeter posterior to the right cuspid. In the upper arch, <PERSON> has
all of his teeth back through the second molars. Has just a slight Class
III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm, and on the left
side he is end-on Class II. In the upper arch, the right cuspid is 1 to
2 mm posterior to the left cuspid. Posterior teeth do not touch on the
right side. Most of the occlusion is on his incisors at this time as on
both side he has an open bite. Left cuspids appear to touch on the upper
first bicuspid, lower second bicuspid and perhaps the upper right
cuspid, lower first bicuspid touch. Therefore, he occludes on the
maxillary right cuspid, first bicuspid, lower right bicuspids, four
central incisors, and left cuspids. All other teeth are out of
occlusion. He has an anterior overbite of about 1 mm. Intraorally, it is
very difficult to observe the oropharynx without <PERSON> gagging. Tongue
seems hyperfunctional. The glimpse I could get demonstrates that the
uvula is completely gone. The soft palate appears short
anteroposteriorly.

Intranasally, the septum has been operated on a couple of times. Does
deviate a little bit toward the left side but not too significantly.
Turbinates appear fairly small, and he may have had a previous
turbinectomy performed. <PERSON> appears a little bit wide. Holding the
nostrils open, he could breathe a little bit easier through his nose.
Luminal valves appear relatively normal in size.

On opening, <PERSON> is aware of some clicking in his jaw joints
particularly on the right side. Using a stethoscope, I could hear some
clicking kind of noises in the right TMJ and also a little bit on the
left side. To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head and neck
area. Incisal opening is about 50 mm. Excursive movements to the right
are 10 mm and to the left 11 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that he has a root canal in the maxillary left central
incisor. Mandibular third molars are absent, but upper third molars are
impacted. Sinuses look relatively clear. <PERSON> are not seen on the
x-ray. He has had his orthodontic appliances on for only about a month.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are all clear. Seems to have a fairly
good airway. Base of the floor of the nose does not appear to be as
open. Maxillary midline appears to be pretty much on the facial midline.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit arthritic.
Some anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is fairly steep.
However, superior joint space looks fairly good.

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that appears a little bit
arthritic. Appears to be some sclerosis on the head of the condyle.
<PERSON> appears long anteroposteriorly with a little bit of anterior
beaking present. Articular eminence does not appear as steep on this
side. Joint space appears reasonably good.

On opening, there are good excursive movements. The articular eminence
appears quite flattened in the left joint. This may be due to the
chronic forward posturing of the mandible. Possibly some of the changes
in the condylar head could be due to the long-term splint therapy that
he was under. In the right joint, the anatomical details are not as
clear. <PERSON> processes appear to be elongated.

Cephalometrically, he was not in centric relation when the x-ray was
taken as he is postured forward to an end-on incisor position. The soft
palate looks quite short. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level
measures about 5 mm and at the base of the tongue in one area only
measures about 2 to 3 mm. The sinuses appear clear. I do not see much
evidence of turbinates present in the nose. Jaws appear somewhat
retruded. Lower incisors are overangulated. Probably a moderately high
occlusal plane angle relationship.

Tooth-size analysis shows that there is a <PERSON>’s difference of over
2.5 mm.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  AP maxillary deficiency

2.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

3.  AP mandibular deficiency

4.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and possible articular disc dislocations

5.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of 2 to 3 mm (normal
    dimension 11 mm)

6.  Sleep apnea syndrome

7.  Snoring

8.  Daytime somnolence

9.  High occlusal plane angle

10. Occluding on the four central incisors, maxillary right cuspid,
    first bicuspid and mandibular cuspid, first bicuspid, and left
    cuspids

11. Bilateral posterior open bite

12. Overangulation of lower incisors

13. Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 2.5
    to 3 mm

14. Impacted maxillary third molars x 3

Recommended Treatment

1.  MRI of left and right TMJs

2.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower
        anterior teeth removing 2.5 to 3 mm of tooth structure and close
        the spacing to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy and help
        decrease the overangulation of the lower incisors

3.  Surgery

    A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward
        approximately 5 mm at the incisal edge and downgraft it
        posteriorly approximately 5 mm to level the occlusal plane

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction

    C.  Removal of bilateral impacted maxillary third molars x 2

    D.  Consider bilateral TMJ surgery if MRI confirms that the discs
        are dislocated

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
