KRISTA WEST 03/23/2009

<PERSON> is 54 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 101 <PERSON>., #202, Westlake Village, CA 91362. <PERSON> is in good health. She

1.  Eating difficulties due to anterior open bite with inability to bite
    through foods.

2.  Four to five teeth, predominantly molars, touch and are getting worn
    with cracked fillings and inlays.

3.  Mouth breathing.

4.  Difficulties breathing through the nose.

5.  Crooked jaw and chin.

She has had two previous right knee surgeries, one following an
automobile accident in 1985 and the same knee was operated on in 2005 to
remove a bursa from the right knee.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial
symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about
25 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. The maxillary
midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental
midline is about 2 to 3 mm off to the right side. <PERSON> is probably about
4 to 5 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental midline and chin
midline are fairly close to being aligned. In profile, the upper lip and
maxilla are probably about 3 to 3 mm AP deficient and the chin is
probably about 10 to 12 mm AP deficient. The chin neckline is shorter,
although the chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. She does have a
slight head postured forward head position. Intraorally, she has all of
her lower teeth back through the third molars present. She has some
significant crowding of the lower anterior arch and malrotations of the
teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the
third molars. She has significantly constricted maxillary arch
transversely. She has some moderate crowing in the upper arch as well.
She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side and
closer to Class I on the left side. <PERSON> has an anterior open bite of
about 4 mm. She has right-sided crossbite. She has a significantly
increased curve of Wilson in the lower arch and also in the upper arch.
The lower posterior teeth are tipped lingually and the upper teeth are
tipped buccally. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and relatively
normal in architecture. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little
bit off towards the right side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged.
Luminal valves may be slightly constricted. To palpation, she has some
mild tenderness over the masseter muscles and retromandibular area. On
opening, initially she had no noises in her joints. On excursion, she
had some consistent clicking in the left joint. Then on closing as she
would open the first time, the left joint would click. Maximum incisal
opening is 56 mm. Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.
There is a slight transverse cant in the occlusion with the maxillary
left side being no more than a millimeter lower than the right side and
in the mandibular arch on the left side is 1 to 2 mm lower than the
right side. She does demonstrate some bilateral infraorbital hypoplasia.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows a large condyle on the left side
and a small condyle with significant arthritic changes on the right
side. Sinuses appear relatively clear. All the teeth are present through
the third molars. <PERSON> appears deviated a little bit off towards the
right side and turbinates are moderately large with the left one being
significantly larger than the right side.

Coronal view shows a significant deviation of the septum off towards the
right side. The turbinate on that side is not quite as a large, but with
the septum deviated, it decreases the airway there. The left turbinate
is quite large. Sinus, however, appear clear. <PERSON> appears off towards
the right side.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are enlarged, with the left side
being larger than the right side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is enlarged vertically as
well as mediolaterally. There appears to be a little bit of anterior
beaking present. Joint space in some areas appears decreased.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is small in size. There is
some anterior beaking present. Joint space appears reasonable.

Coronal view of the left condyle shows that there appears to be
significantly decreased joint space vertically. Lateral rim of the fossa
curves inferiorly probably 2 mm. There appears to be greater decreased
joint space at the lateral aspect of the fossa as compared to the middle
and medial side.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is narrow in mediolateral
width. There appears to be decreased joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there appears to be AP
maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia. There is anterior vertical excess.
There is an anterior open bite of approximately 3 to 4 mm. There appears
to be a high occlusal plane angle. The AP dimension of oropharyngeal
airway measures about 5 mm at the base of the tongue and about 5 mm at
the soft palate level as well. <PERSON> has a tooth size discrepancy of
about 2 mm. There is a reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch with the
incisors being probably 3 mm lower than the flat plane. In the upper
arch, she has a definite rocker shaped curve of <PERSON> with the incisors
being almost 4 mm above the flat plane. <PERSON> occludes predominantly on
the first and second molars on the left side and first, second, and
third molars on the right side.


1.  Left TMJ condylar hyperplasia (arrested) and articular disc
    dislocated anteriorly at the lateral aspect of the joint and
    posteriorly at the medial aspect.

2.  Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocated without reduction.

3.  Maxillary AP hypoplasia, vertical hyperplasia, and transverse
    hypoplasia.

4.  AP mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry with mandible shifted off to
    the right side approximately 3 mm.

5.  Anterior open bite of 3 to 4 mm.

6.  Class II end-on occlusion on the right side, Class I occlusion on
    the left side.

7.  Right-sided crossbite.

8.  Significant crowding in the lower anterior arch and moderate
    crowding in the maxillary anterior arch.

9.  Reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch and accentuated curve of
    Spee in the upper arch.

10. Increased curve of Wilson in both arches.

11. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5 mm (normal
    11 mm).

12. Septal deviation off towards the right side.

13. Hypertrophied turbinates.

14. Nasal airway obstruction.

15. Malaligned third molars x4.

16. Occludes predominantly on the first and second molars with the other
    teeth essentially out of occlusion.

17. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 1 to
    2 mm lower than the right side.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Align the maxillary arch in two
          occlusal planes by placing a vertical step to align the four
          incisors at an elevated plane and to try to extrude the
          cuspids vertically 1 to 2 mm, if possible. Tip lateral incisor
          roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
          teeth removing 2 to 3 mm of tooth structure to correct for the
          tooth size discrepancy and to try to keep from flaring the
          lower incisors too far forward. Upright molars over basal bone
          to decrease the curve of <PERSON>.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
          Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
          Mitek anchor.

    c.  Left mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to advance the
          mandible.

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly,
          expand it, and eliminate the accentuated curve of Spee.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    f.  Nasal septoplasty.

    g.  Fat graft to right TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
