<PERSON> 07/14/2008

<PERSON> is 14 years old, birth date 06/17/1994. Referred by Dr. <PERSON>. <PERSON> is in good health. Her jaw problems began at about the age
of 7 when she developed headaches that were at one time quite severe
had orthodontics to include such things as an expander and a thumb
sucking appliance. More recently, she had a <PERSON> appliance placed that
was ineffective, and she then subsequently had all four first bicuspids
extracted. She then went to see Dr. <PERSON>. In addition, she has had
previous physical therapy, chiropractic treatment, and kinesiology
treatment without significant help.

She has no current problems with headaches. She gets headaches maybe
once or twice a month that can get up to a level of 9 around the left
eye which would include probably the left frontal and temporal area. She
rates her average TMJ pain about at 1, average daily pain at 0, jaw
function at 2, diet at 1, and disability at 1. She has a leg length
discrepancy with the right leg 1 inch shorter than the left. Also, her
right foot is 1 1/2 sizes smaller than the left foot.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty
much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm
off to the right side. <PERSON> is just slightly off to the right side 1 or
2 mm. In profile view, she has fairly good balance between her upper
lip, cheeks, and nose with maybe just a slight deficiency of a couple of
millimeters. The chin is retruded by at least 15 mm. <PERSON> neckline is
short. <PERSON> neck angle is not too well defined. She has a head postured
forward neck position. Intraorally, she is missing the lower first
bicuspids. She has some spacing in the lower arch, but not a full
bicuspid width. In fact, the right side is closed up considerably with
only about 2 to 3 mm on that side, but on the left side there is
probably 4 mm of spacing. In the upper arch, she is missing the first
bicuspids and likewise has about a 4-mm space on the left side and about
a 2-mm space on the right side remaining. She has a slight cant in the
occlusal plane with the left side being about 1.5 to 2 mm lower than the
right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Uvula is
slightly elongated. The soft palate looks relatively normal. The fascial
pillars are mild to moderately constricted. Tonsils appear mild to
moderate in size. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size.
The septum appears reasonably straight. There is probably moderate nasal
airway obstruction. She has some mild snoring, but does not report
daytime somnolence. She does not report any sleep apnea episodes.
However, she has significant problems sleeping and will wake up at night
and then be unable to get back to sleep. She is predominantly a mouth
breather at nighttime. During the daytime, she has improved some with
her orthodontic treatment, but still may breath a lot through her mouth.
To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the right TMJ right
retromandibular area. Maximal incisal opening is 37 mm, excursion
movement to the right 10 mm, to the left 11 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: Panorex shows the absence of four first
bicuspids and the presence of all four impacted third molars. The
condyles appear arthritic. Sinuses look relatively clear. The left
turbinate appears enlarged.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Bony septum
appears reasonably straight. Turbinates are moderate in size and there
does not appear to be a significant airway passage.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that the condyle is quite small in size with a
loss of volume anteroposteriorly as well as vertically. Articular
eminence is moderately shallow. The anterior joint space is increased
and the posterior joint space appears to be decreased.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is small in size with loss of
volume vertically and anteroposteriorly. Articular eminence is slightly
more steep on this side. The anterior joint space is decreased and the
posterior joint space is decreased. On opening, there appears to be some
restricted translation in the left joint compared to the right side,
although the opening is not quite as good.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II
jaw relationship with a high occlusal plane angle. She has some
adenoidal tissue in the nasopharyngeal area. Turbinates extend slightly
beyond the hard palate. Oropharyngeal airway dimension is about 3 mm at
the soft palate level and about 3.5 mm at the base of the tongue.


1.  Bilateral TMJ AICR.

2.  AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

4.  Class II end-on occlusion.

5.  High occlusal plane angle.

6.  Missing all four first bicuspids, extracted for orthodontics.

7.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

8.  Nasal airway obstruction.

9.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm
    (normal 11 mm).

10. Impacted third molars x4.


1.  Surgery Stage 1.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
        osteotomies if they are necessary.

        1.  Consider closing the spaces by losing posterior anchorage
            particularly on the left side more so than the right side.

        2.  Consider opening the bicuspid spaces bilaterally.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

        1.  Close spacing in the lower arch by losing posterior
            anchorage to a greater percent on the left side than the
            right side and minimize retraction of the incisors.

        2.  Consider opening spaces in the lower arch to equal the size
            of the first bicuspids. This will tip the lateral incisors
            significantly forward and could possibly create some
            asymmetry in the arch.

3.  Surgery Stage 2.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
        with Mitek anchors if not performed as a separate procedure.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise rotation.

    c.  Maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect and
        advance.

    d.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    f.  Augmentation genioplasty if spaces are opened in the arches to
        replace the first bicuspids.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Restorative dentistry to replace the four bicuspids, if the spaces
    are opened.
