<PERSON> WISDOM 05/02/2008

<PERSON> is 46 years old. Referred by <PERSON>, DDS, 3929 Bayless
Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63125. She has a TMJ problems. She was treated
last year for breast cancer including a right breast mastectomy. She has

1.  Prevacid Slow Tabs 30 mg q.d.

2.  BuSpar 15 mg q.d.

3.  Women’s vitamins including vitamin D.

4.  Aspirin, Tylenol, etc., as needed for pain, although she tries to
    avoid it because they upset her stomach.

<PERSON>’s TMJ problems began many years ago, but it was in 1995 when she
dislocated her condyles forward into an open locked position that she
first sought treatment. Up to that time, she was not really symptomatic
except for clicking and popping. She saw Dr. <PERSON>. Dr. <PERSON>
treated her with splint for about 6 months and the pain and clicking
went away. She did relatively well until 2007 when she developed
increased clicking, popping, and pain once again. She returned to see
Dr. <PERSON> and in June 2007 he made a splint for her and this does help
her some. This relieved the clicking and shooting pains, but she still
has pain down through her neck, shoulder, and back area. She has
received physical therapy since June 2007 about once a month. She does
tend to get numbness in her arms and hands, but the physical therapy
seems to help relieve that. <PERSON> gets headaches at about a level of 5
in the frontal and temporal areas. She gets some eye twitching also that
is bothersome to her. She rates her TMJ pain at 4, average daily pain
between 7 and 10 which varies with stress. She rates her jaw function at
5, diet at 7, and disability at 9. <PERSON> complains of no airway
problems. Apparently, does not snore or have any sleep apnea issues. She
has difficulty sleeping at night and wakes up every 2 ½ hours or so. She
has moderate daytime somnolence.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial asymmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about -1 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty
much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is off to the
right side about 1-2 mm. <PERSON> is off to the right side about 2-3 mm. In
profile view, <PERSON> has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 3-4
mm. <PERSON> neckline is extremely short. The chin is retruded by probably
12-15 mm. <PERSON> does have some crenations around her tongue. <PERSON> is
missing a bicuspid on the left side of the maxilla, but appears to have
the rest of her teeth. The maxillary midline actually may be about 1 mm
off towards to the left side. She has a posterior open bite on the left
side and on the right side, and she has a crossbite on the right side.
She has an anterior deep overbite of about 2 mm. She is fairly close
being a Class I cuspid with just a slight Class III tendency on the left
side and just a slight Class II tendency on the right side.
Transversely, she is fairly level with maybe the right side being 1 mm
higher than the left side, but not real significant. Oropharyngeal
airways look relatively normal, although the fascial pillars appear
moderately constricted. Intranasally, the turbinates appear normal to
moderate in size. The septum appears to be deviated a little bit off
towards the right side. The airway intranasally appears wider on the
left side as compared to the right side. The columella is wide and
nostrils are fairly narrow. However, she does state that she breathes
through her nose when she sleeps and also during the day. To palpation,
<PERSON> has some moderate pain over the right masseter muscle, but no
other tenderness to palpation. She has crepitation in both jaw joints.
Maximal incisal opening is 43 mm, opening without discomfort 30 mm. She
could move to the right side about 4 mm and to the left 5 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of mandibular left
and right first and second molars, maxillary third molars, as well as
the right second molar. She also appears to be missing the first and
second bicuspids. She has a three-unit bridge on the right side, so I
assume she is maybe missing just the second bicuspid, and she has a
four-unit bridge on the left side. The right condyle appears arthritic
with some anterior beaking present.

Waters view shows that bony septum is very straight. Turbinates are
moderately enlarged particularly on the right side. Airway appears to be
somewhat compromised. Sinuses appear relatively clear, although the left
maxillary sinus is just slightly cloudy compared to the right side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little sclerotic on
top. Joint space seems moderately good. Articular eminence is moderately
steep.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears a little bit more
arthritic. There is some anterior beaking and a little bit more
sclerosis in it. Joint space appears decreased vertically and
posteriorly. On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles.
Both condyles appear a little bit arthritic in the open views with the
right side worse than the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II
relationship. She has posterior open bites. She has a high occlusal
plane angle. She has a retruded maxilla and mandible. Oropharyngeal
airway measures about 7 mm at the soft palate level and about 9.5 mm at
the base of the tongue high and low it measures more like 4 mm.


1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  Posterior maxillary vertical deficiency.

4.  AP mandibular deficiency.

5.  High occlusal plane angle.

6.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

7.  TMJ pain.

8.  Headaches.

9.  Myofascial pain.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prosthesis.

    b.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.

    d.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
