<PERSON> 09/26/2007

<PERSON> is 41 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON> from Monterey.
<PERSON> is in good health with no major medical problems. <PERSON> takes no
medications. In 1987, she had surgery for her TMJs, but it was not TMJ
surgery that was performed but instead she had probably bilateral ramus
osteotomies to reposition the mandible. She had her jaws wired together
for five weeks. She did okay for awhile after that surgery but then
developed pain again. It got fairly severe and in March of 2007 Dr.
Navaro made a bite plate for her to wear and none of this has helped her
significantly. <PERSON> did have orthodontics as a teenager but then she
had it again beginning probably in about 1986 prior to her jaw surgery
and then had the braces on for the surgery as well as for a time
afterwards. So she probably had braces on roughly from 1986 to 1988. She
did have four cuspid extractions done on her jaws. Her jaws are quite
small and constricted. She does snore some. She has a fair amount of
moderate daytime tiredness but is not aware of having any sleep apnea
problems.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2
mm. Maxillary midline is about 1 mm. off to the left side. Mandibular
dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The chin is about 2
to 3 mm off to the left side. In profile view she has some problems with
the nasal dorsum. She has some AP deficiency in the maxilla by probably
about 4 to 5 mm. <PERSON> is retruded probably 10 to 12 mm. Chin-neckline is
a little bit short although the chin-neck angle is relatively well
defined. Intraorally she is missing lower second bicuspids. The lower
arch is quite constricted. She has large lingual tori. In the upper arch
she also is missing probably the second bicuspids. The upper arch is
also constricted and close to being a Class I cuspid relationship. She
has a deep bite of probably about 3 to 4 mm. Posterior faucial pillars
appear to be posteriorly positioned. The tonsils appear relatively
normal. Intranasally, there is a little bit of fullness of the septum
tipping off towards the left side. Turbinates are moderate in size. The
occlusal plane maybe just slightly tipped up about ½ mm on the left
side. Intraorally, she does have bilateral lingual tori that are quite
large. She gets occasional earaches. No tinnitus and occasional vertigo.
Other joints that bother her include her left shoulder and her hips.
Frequently she has problems with the muscles in her neck and shoulders.
She does clench her teeth at night but she does not think she does it
during the day because it hurts too much. With jaw function, <PERSON> has
audible crepitation in her TMJs. Maximal incisal opening is 50 mm.
Opening without significant pain 40 mm. Excursive movements are 8 mm in
each direction but these movements are painful.


Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four second
bicuspids. The sinuses appear reasonably clear. The left condyle appears
quite small and arthritic. The right condyle appears arthritic but much
larger than the left side. There are some residual wires in the right
ramus area. She has root canals on the maxillary right central incisors,
right lateral incisor and the first bicuspid.

Waters view shows that she has a little septal spur off the bony septum.
Turbinates appear large on the right side. Sinuses look relatively
clear.

<PERSON> 09/26/2007 <PERSON> tomogram shows what appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact
with significant arthritis. Relatively moderate slope to the articular
eminence.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is some decreased joint space and the
condyle appears quite arthritic. Articular eminence is moderately steep.
On opening there is good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a retruded
maxilla and mandible. Oropharyngeal airway is extremely constricted with
only about 2 mm of airway space at the base of the tongue and maybe 3 to
4 mm at the soft palate level. She has a mild high occlusal plane angle.
She has a relatively deep incisor relationship.


1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with severe degeneration of the
    articular disc in the presence of perforations with bone-on-bone
    contact.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  Posterior vertical maxilla deficiency.

4.  AP mandibular deficiency.

5.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of less than 2 mm (normal
    dimension is 11 mm.)

6.  Missing all four first bicuspids and all four third molars.

7.  Anterior deep bite.

8.  Basically a Class I cuspid molar relationship.

9.  Significantly enlarged bilateral mandibular lingual tori.

10. TMJ pain.

11. Headaches.

12. Myofascial pain.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    e.  Surgical removal of bilateral mandibular tori.

    f.  Four second bicuspid extractions.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
