<PERSON> 12/09/2005

Cindy is 45 years old, referred by <PERSON>, DDS, MSD. <PERSON> has had
a previous collar bone that apparently was operated on and she has had
her tonsils removed. <PERSON> is in good health with no major medical
problems. She takes no medications except for Excedrin for her
headaches.

PRIMARY CONCERNS

1.  Difficulty breathing through the nose.

2.  Headaches.

3.  Tension in the head and neck area.

4.  Difficulty breathing.

5.  Only the back teeth cut and she can only chew on the right side.

6.  Sleeping difficulties.

7.  Predominant mouth breather.

8.  Significant daytime tiredness.

<PERSON> has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or hearing loss, but does
get occasional vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her left
elbow and right 5th finger. She is not aware of clenching or bruxing at
night. In fact, she feels she usually sleeps with her mouth open and she
will frequently have a dry mouth in the morning and a sore throat. The
onset of her problems associated with the jaw joints may have began in
to the doctor for headaches in her early teens. <PERSON> gets headaches
about every 10 days or so and they seem to involve most of the head area
at about a level of 7. She relates no specific pain in the jaw joints.
She rates her levels on an average day at about 4 although it is not
there all the time. She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 8,
disability at 8.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Maxillary midline may be 1-2 mm to the
right. Mandibular midline is 1 mm to the left facial midline. In profile
view, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale. <PERSON> is
probably deficient by probably about 1 mm or so. The maxilla is retruded
by probably about 4 mm. <PERSON> is retruded by probably 15 to 18 mm.
Chin-neckline is short and no definition on the chin-neck angle.
Intraorally, <PERSON> is missing mandibular left 2nd molar and all 4 3rd
molars. She has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior
arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the 2nd
molars. In centric relation, mandible and chin may be 1 mm off to the
right. In centric relation there is 2 to 3 mm of discrepancy between the
midlines. She is Class II end-on by probably 4 to 5 mm on the left side
and probably 2 mm on the right . There is about 2 mm open bite. In
centric occlusion, she occludes only on the right second molars and all
other teeth are out of occlusion. To palpation, <PERSON> has no tenderness
around the head and neck area. She does have crepitation in both joints.
Maximal incisal opening is about 50 mm. Excursive movement to the right
10 mm, to the left 12 mm.

<PERSON> 12/09/2005 Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Cindy is missing all four third molars and the mandibular left second
molar. She has root canals on the maxillary right first bicuspid, second
bicuspid, first molar, maxillary left central incisor, lateral incisor,
first and second bicuspid, first and second molars, mandibular left
first molar, mandibular right first molar. She has crowns on all the
posterior teeth from the bicuspids posteriorly as well as the left
central and lateral incisors. The sinuses look relatively clear. The
joints look arthritic.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear although a
little bit cloudy in both of them. The left turbinate looks huge. The
nose is almost totally blocked off. The nasal septum is deviated in the
bony septum off to the right side. Right turbinate looks relatively
small though the entire transverse width is very constricted. The left
turbinate does look incredibly large or it is possible there could be a
nasal polyp in there.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a joint that appears arthritic. Articular
eminence is relatively moderate in steepness. Significantly decreased
vertical joint space indicative of displaced disc. Posterior joint space
is also decreased.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is
significant anterior beaking present. Decreased superior joint space.
Articular eminence is moderately steep. On opening, there is actually
fairly good translation of the condyles and both condyles come down
beneath the articular eminence. The arthritic changes in the condyles
can be appreciated in this view with anterior beaking in both joints.
There is also significant decreased joint space with there even being
less joint space on the right side as compared to the left side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla appears AP
retruded and the mandible is significantly AP retruded. Anterior open
bite and an overjet of about 6 mm. The occlusal plane appears high. The
oropharyngeal airway is severely constricted with the airway dimension
of about 3 mm at the soft palate level and no more than 4 mm at the base
of the tongue. The lower incisors appear a little bit overangulated.
Tooth size analysis shows a <PERSON>'s difference of 1 mm. However, the
right maxillary central incisor crown is at least 1.5 mm larger than the
left central incisor crown.

BASIC DIAGNOSES

1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with
    severe deformation, degeneration and nonsalvageable.

2.  Anterior vertical maxillary excess.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

5.  AP mandibular deficiency.

6.  Class II occlusion being significantly worse than the left side as
    compared to the right side.

7.  High occlusal plane angle.

<PERSON> 12/09/2005 Page 3

8.  Anterior open bite and left-sided open bite.

9.  Occluding only on the right second molars and all other teeth are
    out of occlusion.

10. Left-sided crossbite.

11. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.

12. Hypertrophied turbinates.

13. Nasal septal deviation.

14. Nasal airway obstruction.

15. Snoring.

16. Daytime somnolence.

17. Masticatory dysfunction.

18. Headaches.

19. Overangulation of lower incisors.

20. Sleep disorder.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip the lateral incisor roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
        osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize lower anterior teeth
        removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to keep from flaring the
        lower incisors any further forward and to correct the small
        tooth size discrepancy (1 to 2 mm.)

2.  CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly,
        advance it slightly and expand.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    d.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    f.  Nasoseptoplasty.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
