<PERSON> is referred by Dr. <PERSON> in Clifton, NJ. Phone number is
973-778-7171. <PERSON> states that in 1965 she got hit in the mouth with a
time game bomb which is a game and fractured some of her teeth and may
have hurt her jaws. It was not until the birth of her second child in
1980 that she began developing severe headache problems. In 1985, she
had orthodontics on her lower teeth only as they were afraid to touch
her upper teeth. She has had splints in the past beginning about 10
years ago. She has had physical therapy on and off and massage therapy.
She has had splints for the past two years though they do not seem to be
helping her very much. More recently she has had some lidocaine
injections which did help her short-term. More recently, she has had
Botox injections into the muscles.


1.  Imitrex in the mornings four to five times per week.

2.  Naprosyn.

She gets significant problems with earaches, tinnitus and she can get
severe vertigo. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night but no does
believe she does it during the day. She usually wakes up with her severe
headaches in the morning. These occur almost daily now at a level of 10
in the frontal, temporal, posterior had and top of the head areas. She
rates her TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 5,
diet at 3, disability at 7.


1.  Pain in jaw particularly on the right side.

2.  Ear always feels clogged on the right side.

3.  Migraines which can wake her up three to five days per week.

4.  Neck and shoulder pain.

5.  <PERSON> has become more retruded.

6.  Always feels dazed from the ear pressure.


1.  No more headaches, TMJ pain or jaw pain.

2.  No more ears clogged.

3.  <PERSON> back to normal position.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relation is about 2
mm. Maxillary, mandibular and <PERSON> are all pretty much aligned
on the facial midline. In profile, she has some AP deficiency of the
maxilla of probably 3 to 4 mm. <PERSON> is retruded about 15 to 18 mm.
Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not well
defined. Intraorally, she is missing mandibular right first molar but
has her second and third molars. The second molar is shifted forward so
the size of the pontic replacing the first molar is the size of the
bicuspid. On the left side she has all of her teeth but missing the
wisdom tooth. Likewise, the wisdom teeth are missing in the upper arch
but the rest of the teeth are all present. She has some mild crowding of
lower anterior arch and accentuated curve of occlusion in the lower
arch. She has a Class II cuspid relationship. She has an overjet of
about 3 mm. Probable significant tooth size discrepancy is present.

CLAIRE ZISA 08/11/2006 Page 2

She has a crossbite tendency on the right side. Transversely, the
occlusal plane is fairly level. Intraorally, the oropharynx appears
clear. The uvula is moderately enlarged. Soft palate seems to be mildly
elongated but not too significant. Faucial pillars appear relatively
normal. <PERSON> always feels as though she has a stuffed up nose.
Intranasally, there is some deviation in the nasal septum going from
side-to-side. At the bottom, there appears to be spurring out on both
sides. Turbinates are moderately enlarged. To palpation she has severe
pain over the TMJs and high moderate pain over the styloids, SCMs,
posterior neck, right medial pterygoid area and mild to moderate pain
over the temporalis, masseters, shoulders and left medial pterygoid
area. Maximal incisal opening is 34 mm. Opening without significant pain
23 mm. Excursive movement to the right 5 mm, to the left 8 mm.


Panorex shows the absence of the mandibular right first molar and third
molar. Mandibular right first molar is missing and replaced by a
bicuspid size pontic. The second molar is tilted significantly
lingually. Missing all four third molars. She is also missing maxillary
left lateral incisor replaced by a bridge. There are crown units that
extend all the way from the right maxillary cuspid to the left second
molar. The in the lower arch there is 3-unit bridge replacing the
submandibular right first molar. On the left side she has crowns on at
least two to three teeth. Columellas appear arthritic with the right
side appearing worse than the left side. She has root canals on the
maxillary right lateral incisor, mandibular left second bicuspid and
mandibular right second bicuspid.

Waters view shows that she has hyperplastic turbinates. The bony septum
appears relatively straight. The sinuses appear a little bit hazy but
not too significant.

Right TMJ tomogram shows that she has severe arthritic changes in the
joints with significant loss of condylar volume. Decreased superior and
posterior joint spaces. Articular eminence is relatively flat.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is arthritic but not nearly as
severe as the right side. Significantly decreased superior and posterior
joint spaces. Difficult to identify specific fossa outline. On opening,
there is restricted translation of both jaw joints.

Lateral cephalometric x-ray shows that <PERSON> has a retruded mandible
and chin. High occlusal plane angle is present. Oropharyngeal airway
measures about 7 mm. At the base of the tongue, the airway measures 3 to
4 mm. There is a tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of at
least 5 mm. There is significant crowding in the lower arch. Crossbite
tendency on the right side which will need to be addressed.

CLAIRE ZISA 08/11/2006 Page 3


1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with
    dislocation and probable non-salvageability.

2.  AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  AP microgenia.

4.  AP maxillary deficiency.

5.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

6.  Transverse maxillary deficiency.

7.  Class II end-on occlusion.

8.  Missing mandibular right first molar, maxillary left lateral incisor
    both replaced with bridges.

9.  Extremely small maxillary incisors.

10. Significant tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 5
    to 6 mm.

11. Significant crowding in the lower anterior teeth.

12. Over-angulation of lower anterior teeth.

13. Severe TMJ pain.

14. Severe headaches.

15. Myofascial pain.

16. Masticatory dysfunction.

17. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.

18. Hypertrophied turbinates.

19. Nasal septal deviation and spurring.

20. Nasal airway obstruction.

21. Crossbite on the right side.

22. Nocturnal clenching.


1.  Medications.

  <PERSON> tablet one tablet q.h.s. to control nocturnal
  clenching and bruxism.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Separate all the crowns in the
        upper arch but keep the left lateral incisor pontic attached to
        the left central incisor. Open up spaces at least 1 mm around
        each of the anterior maxillary teeth to help correct for the
        tooth size discrepancy and make more normal size crowns. Expand
        the upper arch somewhat particularly in the cuspid, first
        bicuspid area on the right side.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing 3 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the
        tooth size problem and keep from flaring the lower incisors any
        further forward.

3.  CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

CLAIR ZISA 08/11/2006 Page 4

4.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction and expand.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    d.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    e.  Augmentation genioplasty.

    f.  Nasal septoplasty.

    g.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

6.  Restorative dentistry to reconstruct crowns and bridges.
