<PERSON> 09/14/2009

<PERSON> is 36 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 8411
Preston Road, Suite 850, Dallas, TX 75225.

<PERSON> gets headaches on the average 3 times a week at about a level
of 5, but at least once a week the headaches escalate to a 9 to 10 where
she becomes totally debilitated. She oftentimes when she gets her
headaches will wake up with them in the morning. She rates her TMJ pain
at 7, average daily pain at 6, jaw function at 4, diet at 2, disability
at 4, but 10 when she gets her severe headaches.

The onset of her problems she believes began about 6 or 7 years ago when
she began getting headaches. At age 31, after the headaches began, she
was struck on the lower jaw with a softball. The softball injury knocked
out 3 upper and 3 lower teeth and split her lip open. They were able to
save the teeth and put them back into position.

The only treatment she has had to date includes orthodontics when began
in April 2009 plus medications for her headaches.

She gets earaches frequently, tinnitus frequently, and occasional
vertigo. She has some hearing loss in the left ear. No other joints
bother her. She is aware of clenching at nighttime.


1.  Zomig 10-mg tablets, 4-5 times per month.

2.  <PERSON>.

3.  Benadryl 25 mg 3 times per week.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has good left-to-right
facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is about 3.5-4 mm. The maxillary dental midline is pretty
much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is about 1 mm
to the left. The chin appears to be fairly close to being on the facial
midline. In profile, upper lip supralabrale is posterior to subnasale by
probably 2-3 mm. The upper lip and maxilla are probably about 6 mm AP
deficient and the chin is probably 10-12 mm AP deficient. The chin
neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined,
but there is some submental fullness. Intraorally, <PERSON> is missing
lower first bicuspids and upper first bicuspids. She is pretty much
Class I cuspid bilaterally and has about a 1 mm vertical overbite. She
may be just slight Class II on the left side by 1-2 mm. She has had her
wisdom teeth removed. The soft palate and fascial pillars all look
pretty much normal. Uvula is extremely elongated. I cannot really
identify any tonsils. Intranasally, turbinates may be moderately
enlarged. The septum looks relatively straight. She has a wide columella
and nostrils are very narrow. Holding the nostrils open significantly
improved her abilities to breathe through her nose. To palpation, she
has moderate pain over the masseter muscles, right styloid area, and
shoulders and high moderate to low severe pain to palpation over the
left TMJ and left styloid area. Joints seem to function reasonably
smoothly, although she could detect some fine crepitus in her joints.
Maximal incisal opening is 47 mm, and she could get to about 35 mm
without significant pain and or discomfort. Excursion movement to the
right 9 mm, to the left 8 mm. <PERSON> did have previous orthodontics
when she was 11 for 2 years and included the extraction of 4 bicuspids.
This was done by Dr. <PERSON>. She does have a slight cant in the
occlusal plane with the right side being 1-2 mm higher than the left
side. The midline might about 2 mm higher than the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars and all four first bicuspids. Sinuses look relatively clear.
<PERSON> look a little bit arthritic.

Coronal view shows that the inferior turbinates are quite large. Sinuses
appear clear.

Axial view shows that sinuses are clear and the turbinates are fairly
large.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle that has fairly good
morphology and mediolateral width. There is significantly decreased
vertical joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about
2-3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has reasonably good shape.
Lateral pole is significantly lower than the medial pole. There is
decreased vertical and lateral joint space. Lateral rim of the fossa
curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm on this side.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has some sclerosis on the
head of it. It is somewhat flattened with some anterior beaking. There
is decreased vertical joint space. Articular eminence is moderate in
shape .

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show there are a little bit more
degenerative changes in this joint with greater amount of sclerosis and
anterior beaking as well as flattening of the condylar head as compared
to the opposite side. Articular eminence is slightly more shallow than
the opposite side. There is decreased vertical joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has a retruded
maxilla and mandible with a moderately high occlusal plane angle.
Oropharyngeal airway, however, looks reasonably good with an AP
dimension of about 6 mm to the soft palate and 9 mm to the base of the
tongue. <PERSON> has a tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s
difference of 2 mm.


1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs anteriorly and medially
    displaced with questionable reduction.

2.  Maxillary and mandibular AP hypoplasia.

3.  Class I occlusion on the right, slight Class II end-on occlusion on
    the left.

4.  High occlusal plane angle.

5.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

6.  Hypertrophied uvula.

7.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

8.  Wide columella and narrow nostrils.

9.  Predominantly a mouth breather.

10. Snoring and daytime somnolence.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Make sure lateral
          incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped
          distally in case interdental osteotomies are necessary.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
          teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction.

    d.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    f.  Uvulectomy.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
