<PERSON> 10/24/2009

Address: 180 Heritage Circle W., Left Bridge, Alberta, Canada T1K7K5

Lisa is 31 years old. Based on her questionnaires, she states that she
has had an over/under bite since childhood. The jaw issue was first
noticed when she went to an orthodontist in 1996 and 1997.


1.  Wellbutrin XL 150 mg q.d.

2.  Cipralex 10 mg q.d.


1.  Teeth do not touch.

2.  Keeps her mouth open most of the time because of her severe
    malocclusion.

3.  This increases mouth breathing.

4.  Jaws get tired and achy.

5.  Narrow airway in the back of her throat.

6.  Concerns that her jaw joints are worsening.

7.  Not happy with her appearance.

Lisa rates her TMJ pain at a level of 3 and headaches at a level of 3
that she gets predominantly in the temple areas and behind the eyes. Her
average daily pain is at a level of 1. She rates her jaw function at 1,
diet at 1, disability at 0. She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus,
nor vertigo. She is under treatment for depression and has been on
medications for 8 years.

She has moderate difficulty breathing through her nose and breathes
through her nose a lot when she sleeps. She has snoring and daytime
somnolence. She has had a sleep study, but the results were not back
when she filled out her forms. She apparently does not have any over
sleep apnea symptoms.

Cone beam radiographs were taken of her jaws. The TMJ joints were cut
off and not included in the radiographs. We were unable to open the
photographs and x-rays that were sent via disc. We were able to open the
Planmeca imaging. Therefore, based on the questionnaires and the
somewhat limited imaging of the Planmeca, <PERSON>’s diagnoses likely

1.  Probable TMJ pathology that may include disc dislocations and
    possibly condylar resorption.

2.  Mandibular hypoplasia.

3.  Maxillary AP, posterior vertical and transverse hypoplasia.

4.  Class II occlusion.

5.  High occlusal plane angle.

6.  Anterior open bite.

7.  Hypertrophied nasal turbinates.

1.  Partial nasal airway obstruction.

2.  TMJ pain.

3.  Headaches.


1.  MRI of left and right TMJs to determine present pathology,
    diagnoses, and aid in treatment recommendations.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
          teeth removing approximately 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure to
          help prevent from flaring them any further forward. Be sure to
          include the second molars in the orthodontics.

3.  Surgery (depending on MRI assessment).

    a.  Consider bilateral TMJ reconstruction with mandibular
          advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Consider bilateral Mitek anchors if the discs are salvageable.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus sagittal split osteotomies if Mitek
          anchors are used in the joints

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

This treatment plan should get <PERSON> the best possible treatment outcome.
in the TMJs. An MRI is definitely indicated for evaluation.
