<PERSON> 10/15/2008

<PERSON> is 66 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 591
Horsebarn Road, Suite 100, Rogers, Arkansas 72758. <PERSON> does smoke
one pack of cigarettes per day. She has smoked for 51 years. Primary

1.  Constant severe pain in the right side of the face that is there
    constantly.

2.  Clicking, popping, and grinding in the jaw joints.

3.  Difficulties eating.

4.  Difficulties talking.

5.  Difficulties sleeping, particularly on the right side.

She takes the following medications;

1.  Cardizem 240 mg q.d.

2.  Lipitor 40 mg q.d.

3.  Boniva 1 time per month.

4.  Mobic 7.5 mg b.i.d.

She sometimes has tachycardia and she has mild myocardial bridging. She
had a mild heart attack in 1998. She does have some difficulties
breathing through her nose and breathes predominantly through her mouth.
She has moderate snoring, but is not aware of sleep apnea problems.

<PERSON> problems began in the end of November 2007 with the gradual
face and jaw area. It continued to get worse until in January 2008 she
began seeking help to fix the problem. To date, she has had no
treatment. One doctor thought it might be a salivary gland stone and
another one thought that it was an impacted third molar. Dr. <PERSON>
was the first to identify that it was a joint problem and referred <PERSON> here.

She gets no headaches, but rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain
at 6 and this is predominantly on the right side. She rates her jaw
function at 8, diet at 8, disability at 5. She has constant tenderness,
but no earaches or vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her
left knee, right elbow, upper spine, and fingers. The fingers, however,
only swell and they are not painful.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 30 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about -4 mm. The maxillary and mandibular
dental midlines are fairly well aligned as in the chin. The nasal tip is
just slightly off to the right side about 2 mm. In profile view, <PERSON> appears to have some AP maxillary deficiency and some AP mandibular
deficiency probably 10 to 15 mm. There is probably a B deficient maxilla
probably by 6 mm. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back
through the second molars present. She has significant crowding of the
lower anterior arch. She has adequate attached gingiva. In upper arch,
she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class
I cuspid relationship. She has about a 3-mm deep bite. She has some
moderate crowding in the upper arch and the upper incisors at the mesial
aspect are rotated posteriorly. Oropharyngeal tissues look reasonably
healthy. She has some constricture of the fascial pillars, but otherwise
everything looks fairly normal. She has hypertrophied inferior
turbinates and partial nasal airway obstruction. She has some mild
constricture of the luminal valves. She does have moderate snoring, but
no daytime somnolence. She is not aware of sleep apnea and has no sleep
disorder. She does breathe through her mouth at nighttime. To palpation,
<PERSON> has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Left joint
functions smoothly, however, the right side has audible severe crepitus
present. Maximal incisal opening about 33 mm. She can get up to about 30
mm without significant pain. Excursion movement to the right 8 mm and to
the left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of impacted third
molars in the upper arch and the mandibular left lower arch. She has
some increased calcification around the apex area of the mandibular left
first molar. Sinuses look relatively clear. The right condyle appears
quite flattened with some heterotopic bone extensions anteriorly and
posteriorly.

Waters view shows that the turbinates appear enlarged. Bony septum
appears reasonably straight. Sinuses look clear.

Right TMJ tomogram was a little difficult, but it appears that there are
some significant degenerative changes within the joint and probably
bone-on-bone contact.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some anterior beaking. There is a
decreased vertical joint space and the articular eminence is relatively
shallow. This joint likewise may have a displaced articular disc. On
opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class I
jaw relationship. However, she has a severely decreased oropharyngeal
airway with an AP dimension at the soft palate level of only 3 mm and at
the base of the tongue at no more than 4 mm.


1.  Right TMJ severe arthritis with articular disc dislocation and
    severe degeneration and perforation.

2.  Right TMJ severe pain.

3.  Possible left TMJ pathology, but cannot confirm without MRI, but
    left joint is asymptomatic.

4.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

6.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

7.  High occlusal plane angle.

8.  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of
    3 to 4 mm (normal dimension is 11 mm).

9.  Sleep apnea symptoms.

I discussed with <PERSON> and her husband <PERSON> in reference to the TMJ
and airway issues as well as the jaw malalignment factor. However, at
this point in time, they are only interested in

the right TMJ issue as it is creating severe pain and significantly
interfering with their abilities to carry on normal life activities.

1.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Right TMJ reconstruction with total joint prosthesis.

    b.  Right TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).

    c.  Application and removal of arch bars.
