GLEN PERKINS 11/20/2009

Glen is 58 years old. <PERSON> is a self referral. Primary concern that <PERSON>
has is sleep apnea. He has had sleep studies done and would desaturate
down to 63% oxygen saturation. He has been on a CPAP for the past 2
years and this keeps his oxygen levels up to a fairly good level;
however, he has difficulties tolerating the device and that limits what
he can do in his activities and where he can go. <PERSON>’s primary concerns
involve sleep apnea. He has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or
myofascial pain. He rates jaw function, diet, and disability at 0. He
has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. The other joints
that bother him include his shoulders and his knees where he has
bilateral total joint prostheses. He is not aware of clenching or
bruxing. He used to snore, but since being on the CPAP that goes away.
He has mild daytime somnolence and has probably moderate to severe sleep
apnea. He is a mouth breather at night time and also during the day. He
has been on the CPAP machine for 2 years. <PERSON> did lose about 38 pounds
of weight while he was on the CPAP. He has gained about 15 of it back,
but was noting a significant appreciable difference. He still functions
on about 8-10 level on the CPAP.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial
symmetry. Upper lip length is about 28 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship
is zero. The maxillary midline is pretty close to being on the facial
midline. The mandibular dental midline is also on the midline as is the
chin. In profile view, <PERSON>’s upper lip supralabrale is probably a good
4 mm posterior to subnasale. Upper lip is 6-8 mm AP deficient. <PERSON> is
15-18 mm retruded. <PERSON> neckline and angle are not defined. Intraorally,
<PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. He has
some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch. He has good attached
gingiva. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through the
second molars. He is basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship. He
has got a slight open bite of about 1 mm on the left side and 0 on the
right side. Transversely, the maxilla is level. Oropharyngeal tissues
look normal. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off
towards the right side anteriorly. Turbinates are difficult to evaluate
clinically, although in the front they look relatively normal. <PERSON> has
bilateral clicking in the TMJs. To palpation, <PERSON> has no tenderness
around the head and neck area. On opening, he has clicks in both right
and left TMJs occurring a little bit earlier in the right side than the
left side.


1.  Avelide 150 mg for blood pressure.

2.  Lipitor.

3.  Flonase.

4.  Propecia.

5.  Niaspan.

6.  Celebrex.

7.  Aspirin 81 mg.


1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with
    reductions; arthritis worse on the left side than the right side.

2.  Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.

3.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

4.  Class I occlusion.

5.  Slightly anterior open bite.

6.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm (normal
    dimension 11 mm).

7.  Severe sleep apnea.

8.  The patient has a history of cardiac arrhythmia (code 427.90)
    secondary to sleep apnea.


1.  MRI of left and right TMJ.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward about 6-8 mm at the
          incisal edge, down graft it 5 mm posteriorly.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance it forward in
          a counterclockwise direction approximately 14 mm.
