<PERSON> 03/14/2009

<PERSON> is 18 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 5530 Wisconsin
Avenue, Chevy Chase, MD. <PERSON>’s TMJ problems began when he was about 13
sort of been an ongoing problem for him and he has continued to have
pain in the jaw joints. He gets headaches predominantly in the right
side in the frontal temporal, posterior head, and top of the head at a
level of 4. His average daily TMJ pain affecting the right joint is
about a level 5, but it can escalate to 8. Average daily pain is at 6.
Jaw function is at 5, diet at 5, disability at 4. He gets occasional
earaches, occasional tinnitus, but no vertigo. Other joints that bother
him include his right shoulder and right ankle. He has a diagnosis of
asthma. He has a previous neck injury as well. He is aware of clenching
and bruxing at nighttime, particularly when he wears his splints.

Previous treatments have included orthodontics from the age of 9 to 12
and then again began orthodontics in July 2008. He has had 3 splints
that, although they have helped, have been ineffective in correcting the
problem. He had his wisdom teeth removed in 2004. His ankle injury was
in 2005 or 2006.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about -1. The maxillary midline is just
slightly off to the right side by 0.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline is
0.5 mm off to the left side. The mandibular dental midline and chin are
fairly well aligned with each other. In profile, upper lip supralabrale
is posterior to subnasale by probably 3 mm of so. <PERSON> appears to be
AP retruded by probably 4 mm or so. The mandible is also retruded by
about 10 mm. <PERSON> neckline is short, although the chin neck angle is
moderately well defined, but the submental area is slightly full.
Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back through the second molars.
There is a some spacing in the lower anterior arch, but he does have a
power chain hopefully trying to close the spacing. In the upper arch, he
has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. He has a
slight Class III cuspid relationship by probably about 2 mm on the right
side, but likewise on the left side. He has a slight anterior open bite
of about 1 mm. He has a anterior crossbite tendency. Oropharyngeal
tissues all look normal and healthy. <PERSON> has probably moderate to
severe snoring at times. He has some mild daytime somnolence, but no
sleep apnea at this time. However, as a child he had fairly significant
sleep apnea with 40 awakenings per hour. He had tonsils removed and this
significantly improved this situation. Intranasally, the turbinates
appear at least to be moderate in size. Septum could be a little bit
deviated, but I could only see the anterior aspect of it. <PERSON> was
evaluated by Dr. <PERSON> on August 19, 2008. Dr. <PERSON> has
recommended correction of the deviated septum and reduction of the
enlarged inferior turbinates. <PERSON> does have some gingival recession
around the maxillary laterals and cuspids bilaterally in the upper arch.
To palpation, he has moderate pain over the right masseter, right TMJ,
right posterior neck, right shoulder, and milder tenderness over the
retromandibular areas. Maximal incisal opening is 44. Excursion
movements are 5 mm to the right and 7 mm to the left, opening without
discomfort about 28 mm. <PERSON> feels if he opens his jaw too wide that the
right joint will dislocate out of the socket.

Dental model analysis shows a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the
lower arch. There is a slight increased curve of Wilson in the upper
arch. Dental model analysis reveals no tooth size discrepancy.


1.  Right TMJ reactive arthritis with articular disc dislocation, but
    with reduction.

2.  Possible left TMJ medial disc displacement, but relatively
    asymptomatic joint.

3.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

4.  AP maxillary hypoplasia and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  End-on Class III occlusion.

6.  High occlusal plane angle.

7.  Anterior cross bite.

8.  Anterior open bite of about 1 mm.

9.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

10. Deviated septum with spurring.

11. TMJ pain.

12. Headaches.

13. Myofascial pain.

14. Slight reversed curve of Spee in the lower arch.

15. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

16. Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring, daytime somnolence and a
    previous history of sleep apnea.


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level the maxillary arch. Tip lateral
          incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room
          for interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary.

    b.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Try to elevate the
          lower incisors about 1 mm to help correct the slight reverse
          curve of Spee.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Right TMJ debridement and articular disc repositioning and
          ligament repair with Mitek anchor.

    b.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction, down grafting the posterior
          aspect.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a counterclockwise direction approximately 8 to 10 mm.

    d.  Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies.

    e.  Nasal septoplasty.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
