ISAI ROBLES 10/21/2009

Isai is 17 years old. He was involved in a motor vehicle accident on
February 2, 2008, sustaining a head injury and multiple facial injuries
and fractures. He apparently had a blow-out fracture in his left orbit
and had a fractured skull. Some teeth were knocked out and they were
found along with some glass in his lung. He required a tracheostomy.
Apparently, he was initially paralyzed from the upper right extremity
and lower right extremity. He was in a wheelchair for a while for
mobility, but is now able to walk upright. Apparently, he has some

1.  He cannot smell.

2.  He cannot taste.

3.  Right side is kind of paralyzed.

4.  Difficulty remembering things.

5.  Decreased appetite.

6.  Head hurts a lot.


1.  Nasal bones.

2.  Left zygomatic orbital complex and arch with displacement.

3.  Mandibular fossa.

4.  <PERSON> of the mandible.

5.  Anterior aspect of the left frontal sinus.

6.  Left zygomatic arch.

7.  Lateral pterygoid process.

8.  Left orbital floor blow-out as well as medial wall blow-out.

9.  Fracture of lateral maxillary walls.

10. Right medial blow-out.

He had surgery to repair his facial fractures a few days after the
initial injury.


1.  Popping predominantly in the left joint but sometimes in the right
    TMJ as well.

2.  Missing lower anterior teeth.

3.  TMJ pain.

4.  Significant headaches.

5.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

<PERSON> gets headaches about two times per week at a level of 8 in the left
temporal area. Average daily TMJ pain is about at level of 3, average
daily pain around the head and neck around 2 to 3, jaw function at 5,
diet at 7, and disability at 3.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. He actually has a fairly good occlusal
relationship with a Class I cuspid-molar relationship on the right side
and a Class III end-on molar relationship on the left side. He is
missing the mandibular central incisors and the left lateral incisor,
cuspid, and both bicuspids. He has third molars erupting in on lower
arch. In the upper arch, he also appears to have some third molars
erupting in. <PERSON> has some scarring on his lower left eyebrow and eyelid
and cheek area as well as in the upper lip. He has a scar in the
tracheostomy area as well. Upper lip length is about 28 mm and tooth lip
relationship is 1 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial
midline. The incisors are absent so there is no overbite or overjet
relationship to be measured. In profile, <PERSON> has fairly good facial
balance with some slight AP chin deficiency of probably 5-6 mm. He does
have all four third molars with the maxillary ones and the mandibular
right third partially soft tissue impacted. He has a hyperplastic uvula
and soft palate may be slightly elongated, but other structures look
normal and healthy. Intranasally, he has a septal spur off to the right
side of the septum, and the septum is deviated a little bit towards the
left side. Turbinates are fairly enlarged. He does require medication
including nasal sprays and decongestants at night to help maintain his
nasal airway. He is aware of some snoring issues and he also has
moderate daytime somnolence. At night and even during the day if he
takes a nap, he has been observed to gasp for air. To palpation, <PERSON>
has moderate pain over the left temporalis, milder pain over the right
SCM, and some slight discomfort over the left TMJ. On opening, there
appears to be glitches in his joints bilaterally and he also tends to
shift a little bit off towards the left side, probably 2 to 3 mm.
Incisal opening is about 41 mm, excursion movements are about 4 mm in
each direction. On excursion movement, he has a click in the left joint
and he may have a glitch in the right side as well.


1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation (need to be
    confirmed by a higher quality MRI).

2.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

3.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  High occlusal plane angle.

5.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm
    (normal AP dimension is 11 mm).

6.  Hypertrophied uvula.

7.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

8.  Septal spur off the right side of the nose.

9.  Partial nasal airway obstruction.

10. Sleep apnea symptoms.

11. TMJ pain.

12. Myofascial pain.

13. Headaches.


1.  New MRI of the TMJs with TMJ coils and high resolution MRI.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior aspect of the
          maxilla.

    d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    e.  Removal of nasal spur right side of nose.

    f.  Partial uvulectomy.

    g.  Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
