B235 
B235 EVALUATION : 55/M DOB: 
Date of Acquisition: Date of Interpretation:
Left TMJ coronal view shows that there is a foreign body within the joint. It is difficult to tell what it is, but it is fragmented in some areas. The condyle is severely arthritic and deformed with an extension going superiorly.

Right TMJ coronal view shows what appears to be a bony ankylosis of the right joint with heterotopic bone growing around laterally and medially to the condyle.

Left TMJ axial view shows a condyle that looks severely degenerated, and there appears to be some type of matter within the fossa. There appear to be bony osteophytes extending off the condyle.

Right TMJ area shows a mass of bone in the area representative of the joint. The mass is quite large extending anteriorly, medially, and laterally. On the right side, there appears to be some vascular clips present.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is severely degenerated. There is foreign material within the fossa, may be silastic, but there are areas where it appears to have fragmented. It appears medially that there may be bone-on-bone contact. There are erosions present in the fossa. There are osteophytes sticking off of the condylar head.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has significant bony growth around it. There is perhaps some kind of a metal object in there, but difficult to tell, and it could just be sclerotic bone. It appears that there may be bony ankylosis present. There are severe degenerative changes involving the condylar head.

Left TMJ severe arthritis with foreign material, perhaps silastic, that is fragmented within the joint. Right TMJ severe arthritis and bony ankylosis.

B235
Demerol 50 mg.
PMS-hydromorphone 2 mg 2 to 4 tablets per day. Baclofen 10 mg at bedtime.
PMS-clonazepam 2-mg tablets q.h.s.
<PERSON>, which is a cream to put over the joints.
Emla cream to put over the joints.
Pantoloc 40 mg each morning.
Imitrex nasal spray.
Proxigel-Lyrica.
Prednisone 5 q.d.
Celebrex 200 mg b.i.d. Motrin 600-mg tablets 2 to 3 times a day.

B235 does not take all of those anti-inflammatories at the same time, but rotates them because of the stomach problems created by his current medical situation. He has had extensive treatments to try to control his situation including pain management, physical therapy, counseling, etc. B235 has been diagnosed as having sleep apnea. He has severe snoring, moderate to severe daytime somnolence, moderate to severe sleep apnea, and a severe sleep disorder. He cannot sleep more than about an hour and a half at a time because of his pain and his sleep apnea problems. He does have difficulties breathing through his nose as well. B235 gets severe headaches in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area and feels that they are behind the eyes at a level of 10. His TMJ pain is at 10, average daily pain at 10, jaw function, diet, and disability all at 10. With some of his past surgeries, he has had difficulties with the facial nerve and has had to have a tarsorhaphy to control the eyelid. He has fairly good function currently with just some weakness in the right mandibular marginal branch. CLINICAL EXAMINATION
In frontal view, B235 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 30 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -1 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline. B235has only 3 lower incisors. Therefore, the lower dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. The chin is fairly close to being on the facial midline as well, may be just slightly to the left side 1 or 2 mm. It is difficult to tell, but I believe he is probably missing the mandibular left lateral incisor. In profile view, B235 has a mustache so it is a little bit difficult to check for maxillary deficiency, but probably it is deficient by 4 to 5 mm. <PERSON> is retruded by at least 20 mm. <PERSON> neckline is extremely shortened and chin neck angle is not defined. He has a significant transverse deficiency in the width of the lower arch. Missing mandibular left probably lateral incisor, the second bicuspid, and at least the first molar. Up above, he appears to have all of his teeth. He does have some dental caries present. He is pretty close to being a Class I cuspid-molar left. He has an anterior deep bite of about 2 mm. Excursion movement to the right is 2 mm and to the left is probably less than 1 mm. Joint noise-wise, it is difficult to evaluate it because incisal opening is only 26 mm and only 18 mm without severe pain. Excursion movement to the right 2 mm, to the left less than 1 mm. He may have some crepitus kind of noises within the joints. Where B235 experiences a lot of the pain is across the top of the head, almost along the cranial suture lines. Also, at the superior aspect of the attachment of the temporalis muscles is an area that he has extreme pain. He gets almost like a vice grip sensation around his head. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the left side with a spur at the base. Turbinates are moderate in size. Left nostril is somewhat constricted because the anterior aspect of the cartilaginous septum is deviated off towards that side. Holding the nostrils open particularly on the left side improved his ability to breathe through his nose.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. He is missing the mandibular right second bicuspid and first molar. Sinuses look clear. He has root canals on the maxillary right first and second molars. He has a fibula graft in the right TMJ area with some bone screws present. He has numerous vascular clips, probably at least 20-25 of them, around the right joint area. He has got heterotopic bone formation around the joint area and a large mass of bone hanging off the front end of where the articular eminence used to be. In the left joint, he has got arthritis and a foreign kind of material in that joint that could be cortical bone or other artificial substance perhaps. Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight. The left nasal airway appears pretty much blocked off with the turbinate. The right turbinate looks smaller in size. The sinuses appear relatively clear.
Multiple and previously failed TMJ surgeries, approximately 15 to each joint.
Right TMJ bony ankylosis.
Left TMJ severe arthritis.
Mandibular hypoplasia.
Maxillary hypoplasia.
Severe sleep apnea. High occlusal plane angle.
Severe TMJ pain.
Severe headaches.
Severe myofascial pain. Severe masticatory dysfunction.
Left nasal turbinate hyperplasia.
Nasal airway obstruction.

CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise direction. Bilateral coronoidotomies.
Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen or buttock).
Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
Left nasal partial turbinectomy.

