B398 
B398 is 29 years old and referred by Dr.   but she has not seen Dr.  . Her sister has some problems and has seen Dr.  and through her sister is how she got referred here. B398 is in good health with no major medical problems. B398 takes no medication although she did take some valium for the MRI this morning.


In frontal view, B398 has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is almost 5 mm. Maxillary dental midline is just slightly off to the left side about 1 mm. Mandibular dental midline and chin are fairly close to being on the facial midline. In profile view, B398 has fairly good balance of the upper lip, cheeks and nose though there is a little bit slight AP deficiency maybe 2 to 3 mm. <PERSON> is probably retruded about 8 to 10 mm. Vertical facial dimensions look good. No problems in the labial mental fold. Chin-neckline may be just slightly short although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined. Intraorally, B398 has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Some minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch and slight accentuated curve of occlusion but not too significant. Appears to have good attached gingiva. In the upper arch B398 has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a Class II end-on occlusion with a division II positioned incisors. She has very small upper lateral incisors. She has a significant reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch with the upper incisors being at least 3 perhaps 4 mm lower than the posterior teeth. Transverse occlusal plane is fairly leveled. Intraorally, the uvula is relatively normal and soft palate is relatively normal. There appears to be some transverse constricture of the faucial pillars. Tonsils are present and look relatively normal. Intranasally, the septum is deviated off a little bit. Tonsils are present and look relatively normal. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side. The turbinate on the left side is fairly enlarged and it appears that there is a decreased airway in the left side. The right side appears fairly side appears fairly wide open even though the turbinate is a little bit enlarged. B398 reports no problems with snoring, daytime somnolence nor sleep apnea. Maximal incisal opening is about 44 mm. However, she can open to about 26 with reasonable comfort. Excursive movement to the right about 10 mm and to the left about 9 mm. B398 does give a history that she has a sister with significant TMJ problems. She also has an aunt that has a lot of TMJ problems and associated pain as well. Tooth size analysis reveals a <PERSON>'s difference of 1+ mm of tooth size discrepancy. 

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth except for the four third molars. She has a crown on the maxillary right first molar. Sinuses appear clear. Nasal airway actually looks fairly good. TMJ condyles appear arthritic with what appears to be loss of bone volume.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone significant arthritic changes with sclerosis in the head of the condyle and a small condyle. There appears to be decreased superior joint space. There is some anterior beaking present.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has undergone arthritic changes. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is deeper on this side as compared to the opposite side. Posterior joint space appears increased in size. Opening views show some restricted translation. Arthritis in the joints appears more severe in the open views than the closed views.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class II relationship and a Class II division II occlusal interrelationship. Oropharyngeal airway appears adequate. She does have a neck postured forward head position. The lower incisors appear overangulated and the maxillary incisors are deangulated.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear clear. There is no frontal sinus development. The bony nasal septum is deviated off towards the left side. The turbinates appear enlarged but on the left side it appears that it may obstruct the airway somewhat.

Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocations with severe deformity of the discs.
AP mandibular deficiency.
Class II malocclusion.
TMJ pain.
Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 1 to 2 mm.

Presurgical orthodontics.
Align and level maxillary arch.
Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing 1 to 2 mm of tooth structure and retract. CAT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
Surgery.
Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

B398 MRI EVALUATION  
Age: 29/Female

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant degenerative changes. Significantly decreased joint space. A lot of sclerosis on the head of the condyle. I suspect there may have been previous surgery performed here. Difficult to specifically identify discal tissue but there is some kind of formation in the joint which could be calcifications or degenerative disc changes. There is an osteophyte extending medially off the condyle. Relatively minimal downward curvature at the lateral rim of the fossa.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is severely deformed with very minimal joint space. Possibly bone-on-on contact. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly a couple of mm. Difficult to identify any discal tissue but there could be some anterior to the condyle. This joint looks very degenerative and possibly may have had previous surgeries or just has extensive degenerative changes.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite arthritic. There appears to be loss of condylar volume. There is sclerosis in the head of the condyle. Some anterior beaking is present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. There is some discal tissue seen towards the lateral aspect of the joint but towards the medial there does not appear to be much there though there is some that appears significantly degenerated. No particular inflammation seen in the joint. On opening, there is moderate translation of the condyle but the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The disc is significantly deformed and short anteroposteriorly and thick in the middle. The disc is anterolaterally displaced. Very questionable salvagaebility of this disc.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has undergone significant degenerative changes with fairly large anterior beaking. Decreased superior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. It has a little bit of an unusual shape to it and it is very long in length. There is some discal tissue present but it is anteriorly displaced and significantly deformed. This is easier seen at the lateral aspect of the joint as compared to the medial. There may be a little bit of fluid in the superior joint space but not too significant. On opening, there is restricted translation and the articular disc remains anteriorly displaced without reduction. The disc is severely deformed and probably nonsalvageable.

IMPRESSION: Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and with significant deformation of the disc. The disc is displaced anterolaterally. Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe deformation and probably nonsalvageable.

