B464 
Doxycycline 100 mg q.d. (for acne rosacea).
<PERSON> 5 mg q.d. (for increased lipids).
Effexor 150 mg q.d.
Niaspan 750 mg q.h.s.
Pravachol 40 mg q.h.s. Atacand 32 mg/12.5 mg q.d.
Prempro 0.3/1.5 mg q.d.
ASA 81 mg q.d.


CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is 0.5 mm. Mandibular dental midline may be shifted just slightly towards the left side about 1 mm. Otherwise, facial symmetry looks good. In profile, she has good facial balance. Intraorally, B464  has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some mild flaring and crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has got crowns on the mandibular first molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars except she has a dental implant replacing the maxillary right central incisors, but has crowns on the implant as well as on the left central incisor. She has Class I cuspid relationship on the right side and slight Class II end-on by only 1 mm, 2 at the very most, on the left side. She has about a 1-2 mm vertical overlap. The uvula is mild to moderately elongated, but the soft palate, fascial pillars and, as best I could see, tonsils looked okay. Intranasally, the turbinates and septum look normal with no evidence of nasal airway obstruction. She has no snoring or sleep apnea symptoms. She has a mild to moderate sleep disorder related to her pain. To palpation, she has some mild tenderness over the right TMJ and left styloid area. On opening, she has sometimes audible crepitation in the left TMJ, but the right joints seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 38 mm, but she could open to about 30 mm and not have too much pain, but beyond that she had fairly severe pain. Excursion movements are about 5 mm in each direction..

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc that is displaced, but severely degenerated. Right TMJ mild arthritis and minimal medial displacement of the articular disc, but asymptomatic.
Left TMJ pain.
Left-sided headaches.
Inability to eat or chew on the left side. Sleep disorder secondary to pain.

CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol).
Surgery. Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
b. Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
3. Application and removal of arch bars.

