GARY HINTERLONG								08-05-02

Gary is 19 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 1809 <PERSON>, Midland, Texas  79701.

Patient History

<PERSON> has had some previous problems with irritable bowel syndrome and has had previous colonoscopy. He had his tonsils removed at the age of 3. He is in good health except for the irritable bowel problems that he has. <PERSON> has proved good control on his irritable problems now, and he just has occasional flare-ups. 

Patient Concerns


    1. Touches only on his back teeth.
    2. The rest of the teeth don’t meet at all.
    3. Difficulties eating and chewing because the teeth don’t fit together.
    4. He has a lot of significant speech problems likely associated with his jaw alignment problems.

<PERSON> has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, headaches, TMJ pain, or TMJ clicking and popping. 

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth to lip relationship is about 0. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 2 mm to the left. Mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well aligned with each other. Therefore, the chin midline is also a couple of millimeters off to the left.

In profile view, <PERSON> demonstrates AP maxillary deficiency of probably 6 to 8 mm in the upper jaw and lip area and in the lower chin area probably around 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short, although the chin-neck angle is fairly well defined. Some prominence of the nasal dorsum is present.

Intraorally, <PERSON> is missing lower first bicuspids and upper first bicuspids. The rest of the teeth appear to be fairly well aligned and leveled. Has good attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Has an extremely accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch. <PERSON> has a full Class III cuspid relationship bilaterally. Has an anterior open bite of 5 mm. On the right side, he occludes only on the mandibular second and third molars and the maxillary first and second molars. On the left side, he occludes only with the maxillary first molar and the mandibular second molar. All other teeth are out of occlusion.

To palpation, he has no myofascial pain problems, and TMJs seem to function smoothly.

Nasally, he has narrow nostrils, and he has a wide columella base. Intranasally, he has a septal spur on the right side. Turbinates are of moderate size. 

Oropharynx appears clear. Tonsils appear relatively small in size. Uvula and soft palate look to have a normal shape and size. His tonsils, in fact, were removed at the age of 3. 

<PERSON> does have a history of asthma as a small child. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation shows the absence of all four third molars. On that right side then he is actually only occluding on the maxillary right first molar, mandibular right second molar, and must have just been some food debris or such material that made it look like there may have been a partially erupted third molar. Wisdom teeth were removed in January of 2002. 

Sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear a little bit enlarged. All four first bicuspids are noted to be absent.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology; not a very good image of it. Articular eminence appears relatively shallow. Joint space looks pretty good. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that doesn’t seem to be quite as smooth as the opposite side. Articular eminence is steeper on the side. 

On opening, there appears to be good translation of both joints. 

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. <PERSON> on the right side appears to be more obstructed than the left side, and there is a spur observed.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows a skeletal Class III relationship with an anterior open bite. High occlusal plane angles are present.

Basic Diagnoses

    1. AP maxillary deficiency.
    2. Vertical maxillary deficiency.
    3. Mandibular prognathism.
    4. Anterior open bite of 5 mm.
    5. Class III occlusion.
    6. Missing all four first bicuspids.
    7. Occluding only on maxillary first molars and mandibular second molars.
    8. Accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch.
    9. Mild facial asymmetry with the left jaw being shifted about 2 mm to the left.
    10. Speech disorder secondary to the deformity.
    11. Irritable bowel syndrome possibly related to the inability to masticate.
    12. AP microgenia.

Recommended Treatment

    1. Presurgical orthodontics
        A. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
        B. Align and level mandibular arch. Try to adjust vertical height of the marginal ridges so that they are a little bit more level, and this would include marginal ridges between the second bicuspids, first molars, and first and second molars.

    2. Surgery
        A. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward approximately 8 mm, downgraft it slightly posteriorly, and decrease the curve of <PERSON> by segmentalization and greater expansion at the palate as compared to the occlusal surface.
        B. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to counterclockwise rotate the mandible into proper occlusion and skeletal relationship.
        C. Augmentation genioplasty via an osseous versus alloplastic implant.

    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
