JO <PERSON> 									09/17/2007

Jodi is 52 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 4700 Bellview L-10, Kansas City, MO, 64112.  His telephone number is 816-561-1115.  <PERSON> has made the rounds.  She has seen Dr. <PERSON> in Houston and also Dr. <PERSON> at the University of Kentucky.  She has had splint therapy from Dr. <PERSON>, Dr. <PERSON>, Dr. <PERSON> and Dr. <PERSON>.  She has had extensive physical therapy and actually goes to physical therapy once a week essentially since 1994.  She has had extensive chiropractic treatment.  She has had injections in the jaws and muscles at Texas Tech.  She has had botox and then she had injections by Dr. <PERSON> at the University of Kentucky.  She has also had biofeedback by Dr. <PERSON> at Texas Tech University.  She also had injections in Odessa by Dr. <PERSON>.  She also has had equilibrations.  She has had acupuncture.  She has been put under traction by physical therapist and chiropractic doctors.  She has had hot and cold treatments.  She has had laser treatment, ultrasound, TENS units, and ionophoresis among other treatments.

    1. <PERSON> 80 mg daily. 
    2. Verapamil 240 mg daily.
    3. Nexium 80 mg daily. 
    4. Reglan 40 mg daily.
    5. Enjuvia 0.625 mg daily.
    6. Zoloft 50 mg daily.
    7. Klonopin 0.5 mg q.h.s.
    8. Advair 2 puffs b.i.d. 
    9. Arthrotec 50 mg daily.
    10.  Flonase 2 sprays b.i.d. 
    11.  Albuterol p.r.n. 
    12.  Allergy shots that are seasonal. 

She has had an adverse reaction to Talwin and Stadol. 

<PERSON>'s problems began sometime in the past.  She has had previous orthodontics with four bicuspid extractions.  She may have had some issues then but she was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 1994 and this is when her problems began to really escalate.  Since that time she has been under extensive nonsurgical therapy.  She apparently had two arthroscopy procedures done on the right TMJ around 1995 or 1996.   In July of 1996, she then had ear cartilage graft to the right TMJ.  

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good left to right facial asymmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary midline is just slightly to the right side as is the mandibular dental midline and chin.  <PERSON> is off about 3 to 4 mm to the left side.  Mandibular dental midline is probably 2 mm off to the left and maxillary midline 1 mm off to the left.  In profile, she has probably about 4 to 6 mm of AP maxillary deficiency and probably 8 to 10 mm of AP mandibular deficiency.  <PERSON>-neck angle is not defined.  Intraorally, <PERSON> is missing mandibular first bicuspids.  She has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars present.  Some minor crowding in the lower anterior arch.  The upper arch is also missing first bicuspids.  
<PERSON>				09/17/2007				Page 2

It is very close to being a Class I cuspid relationship but has a bilateral posterior crossbite tendency being a little bit worse on the right side than the left side.  Oropharyngeal area looks relatively normal.  There is probably about a 2 mm vertical overbite relationship.  Intranasally, the nasal septum at the base has shifted off towards the left side.  The luminal valve on the left side is quite constricted and in fact she has constricture of both luminal valves.  The septum is deviated off towards the left side.  In addition, there is a perforation through the septum.  She has at least moderate nasal airway obstruction probably being a little bit worse on the left side than the right side.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  To palpation, she has moderate to low severe pain over the entire right side of the face.  On the left side she has moderate to high moderate pain over most of the area.  On opening, she has palpable crepitation in the right joint.  The left joint is very smooth.  <PERSON>'s husband says that occasionally he can hear a lout pop on the right side.  Maximal incisal opening is 25 mm.  Opening without severe pain is 18 mm.  Excursive movement to the right is about 4 mm, left less than 2 mm.  Dental model analysis shows bilateral posterior crossbites.  <PERSON> has less than 1 mm of vertical overbite.  She is missing all four first bicuspids.   There is a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.   She has a significantly enlarged right tonsil.  The left tonsil looks relatively normal but the right one is enlarged and does impinge upon the oropharyngeal airway. 

Panorex shows that she has four first bicuspids and all four third molars.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Septum is deviated significantly off to the left side with a bony spur extending off from the left side.  Left TMJ looks quite small and there appears to be a pseudocyst in the condylar head.  The right side appears extremely arthritic with heterotopic bone formation around the condyle area both off the condylar neck itself as well as perhaps in the fossa.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight.  <PERSON> do not appear quite as large except the right side is larger than the left side.  Sinuses appear relatively clear. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows abnormal morphology to the condylar head and heterotopic bone growing off the neck of the condyle.  There may be some bone growing down along the posterior wall of the fossa between it and the condylar head.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in angulation. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is significantly arthritic and resorbed.  There is loss of vertical volume as well as anterior posterior volume.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The joint space appears decreased vertically.  There is sclerosis on the top of the condyle.  It could be a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle.  On opening, there is restricted translation particularly in the right condyle though there is some minimal translation of the left condyle.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has basically a Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship.  However, both the maxilla and mandible are retruded.  Her oropharyngeal airway at the base of the soft palate is only about 2 mm (normal 11 mm) and at the base of the tongue is only about 4 mm (normal 11 mm.)  She demonstrates significant constricture of the oropharyngeal airway. 
<PERSON>				09/17/2007				Page 3

I-CAT 05/18/2007:  Left TMJ coronal view shows significant arthritis in the condyle.  There are some areas of erosion present.  Significantly decreased joint space vertically.

Right coronal view shows severe degenerative changes in the fossa with what appears to be heterotopic bone that has been laid down in the fossa as well as out lateral to the condyle.  There is a huge cystic type lesion in the mid part of the condyle and major degenerative changes in this joint. 

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is quite small anteroposteriorly and appears to have undergone resorptive process.  Articular eminence is relatively normal in angulation.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a very progressed degenerative change in this joint.  There is heterotopic laid down in the fossa and bone fragments that extend from the remaining condylar portion up to the articular eminence.  There are erosions in the articular eminence itself and major erosions in the condylar head as well as osteophytic bone formation off the anterior neck of the condyle.  This is indicative of severe arthritis being greater in the right joint than the left joint. 

    1. Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
    2. AP maxillary deficiency.
    3. AP mandibular deficiency.
    4. Transverse maxillary deficiency.
    5. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.
    6. Hypertrophied turbinates.
    7. Hypertrophied right tonsil.
    8. Deviated nasal septum with a large perforation (8 mm in diameter.)
    9. Nasal airway obstruction. 
    10.  Sleep apnea.
    11.  Severe pain.

    1. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.  Open about 1 mm of space around each upper lateral incisor.
        b. Align and level mandibular arch. 
    2. CT scans of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
    3. Surgery.
        a. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prosthesis.
        b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.
        c. Bilateral mandibular coronoidectomies. 
        d. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
        e. Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
<PERSON>				09/17/2007					Page 4

        f. Nasal septoplasty with repair of septal perforation.
        g. Removal of right tonsil.
    4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
    5. Bonding of maxillary lateral incisors if necessary.

