TRACEY HUGG									08/07/2006 

<PERSON> is 36 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, St. Louis, MO.  Her dentist is Dr. <PERSON>, 380 Suppiger Way, Highland, IL 62249.  

    1. Carafate 1 gram b.i.d.
    2. Cholestyramine b.i.d.
    3. Nexium 40 mg daily.
    4. Zantac 150 mg b.i.d.
    5. Darvocet p.r.n. 
    6. <PERSON>.
    7. Ibuprofen 800 mg p.r.n. 
    8. Multivitamins and iron supplements. 

    1. Severe TMJ pain. 
    2. Severe headaches.
    3. Severe difficulties eating and chewing.
    4. Severe limitation of jaw function.

Todate, she has had no treatment for her TMJ problems.  <PERSON> gets severe earaches but no tinnitus.  She gets vertigo but has no hearing loss.  Other joints that bother her include her left foot and ankle, right index finger and possibly her neck and back but she is not real sure.  She has not had her neck evaluated although she has severe pain in that area.

ALLERGIES:  Latex and <PERSON> and Tylenol No. 3 does not agree well with her.  

She cannot wear cheap jewelry.  Even with her glasses, they have to be either plastic or titanium.  Other metals caused her significant problems.  She is aware of clenching her teeth at nighttime and during the day.  She rates her headaches at a level of 9 and they occur predominately in the frontal, temple and posterior head area.  She rates her average TMJ pain at 9, average daily pain at 10, jaw function at 10, diet at 9 and disability at 9.  <PERSON> does smoke about one pack of cigarettes per day and has done that for 20 years.  She weighs 150 pounds and is 5 feet 6 inches tall.  

    1. Gastric bypass.
    2. Gallbladder removal.
    3. C-section for her fourth daughter. 

In addition to the joint problems, she does have GI problems, chronic anemia, ulcer problems and liver problems.  She had her gallbladder removed in December 2005.  Since that time, she has not been able to get her liver enzymes back to a normal range.  


<PERSON>				08/07/2006 				Page 2



OTHER SYSTEMS:  <PERSON> has problems with her shoulders, right index finger, left ankle, left foot and possibly the neck and back.  She has had lots of urinary tract infections particularly when she was younger.  When her kids were born she was hospitalized for six days because of a kidney infection.  She currently may have a kidney infection.  She does have polyuria at times and nocturia times one.  She is somewhat irregular occurring every 35 to 36 days and she has excessive pain with them.  No fertility problems.  She has had five to seven miscarriages and has four children, all girls ages 17, 15, 10 and 3.  She had an ovarian cyst in high school but no endometriosis.  She has had some eye infections usually as a result of her kids bringing them home from daycare.  She gets seasonal sinusitis.  She smokes one pack of cigarettes per day.  She gets earaches and vertigo.  She gets frequent colds and viruses in the fall and winter.  She has been diagnosed with adult onset asthma that occurs only in the fall and winter.  She has a cough.  She gets recurrent sore throats in the fall and winter.  She gets occasional chest pain.  She gets bronchitis almost yearly all of her life.  She has had pneumonia at least once and perhaps more often but it is not confirmed.  She has problems with nausea, not diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome.  She does get abdominal pain and cramping and has problems with diarrhea.  She is not aware of any diagnosis for chlamydia.  She has chronic fatigue.  She feels she runs a low-grade fever for the past year.  Thyroid has tested normal.  During her school age years she did visit her grandmother who did have some chickens but she does not really remember handling them that much.  No cats.  She has had dogs most of her life that are outdoor dogs.  The only implants are stomach staples and stomach band. 

TRACEY HUGG				08/07/2006 				Page 3


Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and mandibular left second molar.  All other teeth are present.  The right condyle appears arthritic.  Left condyle for some reason is blocked out and did it did not show up.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows the presence of arthritis and what appear to be osteophytes sticking up from the condylar head.  The fossa appears a little bit more healthy but there could be some degeneration there.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows significant arthritis present and perhaps there are some osteophytes sticking up.  It is difficult to see the fossa.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There could be some degenerative changes in the fossa.  On opening there is severely restricted translation of the condyle with virtually no movement.  

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear.  The bony septum is relatively straight and the turbinates appear relatively normal in size.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has good facial balance anteroposteriorly and vertically.  She interestingly has some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx area.  Oropharyngeal airway appears relatively normal with an airway space at the soft palate level of about 8 mm and at the base of the tongue at 9 mm.  

    1. Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis (possible reactive arthritis versus connective tissue autoimmune disease.)
    2. Severe TMJ pain. 
    3. Severe headaches.
    4. Myofascial pain. 
    5. Severe masticatory dysfunction.
    6. History of hypersensitivity to metals.
    7. Rule out connective tissue autoimmune diseases. 
    8. Liver problems, chronic fatigue, chronic low-grade fever and history of continued internal bleeding. 

Recommended treatment would be as follows.
    1. Placement of material samples used in prostheses into the forearm to include titanium alloy and chromium cobalt alloy.
    2. Laboratory tests.
        a. Rheumatoid factor.
        <PERSON>.
        c. Sedimentation rate.
        d. C-reactive protein.
        e. Hematology studies to rule out bleeding and coagulation problems.
        f. CBC.
    3. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
    4. Surgery.
        a. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
        b. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)
    5. Physical therapy as necessary to rehabilitate the jaw function. 


