LARRY HUTCHISON			Telephone Conversation 			04-25-03

This is a patient of Dr. <PERSON>. He is 44 years old. 

Patient Concerns


    1. Has had significant difficulties eating and chewing
    2. Only has two front teeth, with some of the teeth on the left side touching, whereas on the right side, his teeth do not touch

Patient History

He doesn’t have any significant TMJ symptomatology, except he does have subluxation of the condyle on the left side where he would get locked out of place, and he has to manipulate it to get it to reduce. He is not aware of any clicking or popping and normal jaw function. He doesn’t have any TMJ pain or headaches. He does have significant muscular problems in his neck and shoulders to the point that physical therapists have not been able to do much with it. He says he believes he breathes through his mouth perhaps when he sleeps but is not aware of having any significant nasal airway problems. He has a history of having previous orthodontics done when in high school. 

 
    1. AP maxillary hypoplasia
    2. AP mandibular hypoplasia and asymmetry
    3. Class III end-on occlusion
    4. Anterior crossbite 
    5. Moderate crowding, upper anterior arch
    6. Mild crowding, lower anterior arch
    7. Missing all four first bicuspids. These are in the presence of all four third molars
    8. Decreased oropharyngeal airway
    9. Slightly accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch
    10. Periodontal concerns around maxillary cuspids and left lateral incisor
    11. Tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 3 mm
    12. Rule out hypertrophied turbinates causing nasal airway obstruction

 
    1. Presurgical orthodontics 
    A. Align and level maxillary arch 
    B. Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy 

    2. Surgery
    A. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and correct any transverse discrepancies
    B. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible and correct the asymmetry 
    C. Consider partial turbinectomies if they are causing any airway obstruction

    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 
											
