KATHY IVERSON									03-29-04

Kathy is 53 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>.

Patient History

<PERSON> has had previous arthritis in her left big toe which did required surgery. She has done pretty well since that surgery, although her toe remains fairly stiff. She has chronic rhinitis. The chronic rhinitis occurs predominantly in allergy seasons. 

<PERSON> doesn’t have any problems with earaches but does have tinnitus but no vertigo or hearing loss. She says she is aware of clenching her teeth particularly since she got her braces on. She feels that she also probably clenches and grinds her teeth at night. She does feel that she has chronic sinus problems that become exacerbated during allergy season. She does have an allergy to pollens, VICODIN, AND CODEINE. She has no known allergies to jewelry. 

<PERSON>’s TMJ problems have been present as long as she can remember, and this is in reference primarily to clicking in her jaw joints. There is no known etiology. She does have an opening click at 10 mm on both sides and a closing click at 5 mm. She began her orthodontic treatment in 09/2003. She doesn’t have any significant problems with headaches and no particular TMJ pain. She does get achiness and pain around her jaws at about a level of 2. She rates her jaw function at 3, diet at 5, and disability at 0. 

<PERSON> does state that she does get some what she relates to as sinus headaches that appear to occur over the cheekbone areas.  Then usually the next day she may start her period. These two seem to go along with each other.

Current Medications

    1. Estrogen
    2. Synthroid 0.05 mg
    3. Sudafed
    4. Allegra

Patient Concerns

    1. Teeth and jaws don’t line up and fit properly
    2. Difficulties eating and chewing
    3. Her jaws feel very tired, particularly at the end of the day after she has worked
    4. Snoring
    5. Nasal airway obstruction
    6. Chronic rhinitis

Clinical Examination

Upper lip length in about 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is almost 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is fairly close to being on the facial midline, and chin is fairly close or could be just slightly off to the right side about a millimeter. <PERSON> has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 2 to 3 mm. <PERSON> is retruded probably about 10 to 15 mm. Chin-neckline is a little bit short, and she has some fullness in the submental area. Chin-neck angle is reasonably well-defined. As <PERSON> postures her mandible forward, it does significantly improve her overall facial profile. 
<PERSON> has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. She has braces on back through the first molars. Has adequate attached gingiva around the lower anterior arch. Lower teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. Lower incisors might be depressed just a little bit below the level of the cuspids by 1 to 2 mm.

In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has a significant reverse curve of occlusion in the upper arch. She has about a 5-mm Class II occlusion on the right side and about a 4 mm on the left side. She has anterior deep-bite of probably about 5 mm. Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. Cuspids are fairly symmetric anteroposteriorly. <PERSON> appears relatively clear, although it was a little bit difficult to visualize as it should be. She has lingual tori that are fairly good size. 

Intranasally, <PERSON> has hypertrophied turbinates. Turbinates look quite large particularly on the right side. The left side appears to touch against the septum. The septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side. Probably has some significant airway obstruction. <PERSON> is not sure if she breathes through her mouth or her nose when she sleeps.

To palpation, <PERSON> has no tenderness around the head and neck area. No tenderness over the TMJs. However, on opening she has clicks in both joints at about 10 mm and closing clicks at about 5 mm. 

Incisal opening is about 45 mm. Excursive movement to the right is 12 mm and to the left 10 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows that the sinuses appear quite clear. Turbinates appear quite large and seem to block the airway. Septum may be deviated somewhat. She has all of her teeth except for the four third molars which are absent. She has a root canal on the maxillary left central incisor. The right condyle appears somewhat arthritis with flattening on the anterior aspect and some anterior beaking. Left joint appears a little flattened and may have a small osteophyte on the top of it. Posterior teeth appear to be a little bit flattened without much prominence of the cusps on all the molars.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear quite clear. Some deviation of the septum in the bony area off to the left side. Turbinates appear quite large and appear to be obliterating most of the functional airway. This might be the source of some of her chronic rhinitis. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with some significant flattening on the anterior head and appears to be some sclerosis on top of the head of the condyle. <PERSON> might be slightly posteriorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Some anterior beaking is present. Appears to be fairly large air cell above the posterior aspect of the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has a hockey stick shape to it. Quite a bite of flattening on the anterior head, and some anterior beak is present. Appears to be some peaking of head of the condyle. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space looks fairly well-balanced around the condyle.

On opening, there is good translation of the condyles bilaterally. 

Cephalometric radiograph shows there is a skeletal Class II jaw relationship and Class II occlusal relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is quite constricted and in one area appears to be only perhaps 3 mm at the most. That is opposite the soft palate. At the base of the tongue, it is closer to about 8 mm. 
Other Systems

<PERSON> has developed problems in her hips in the last three months. She has had previous arthritis in her large left toe. No problems in the urinary tract. She has three children, ages 20, 24, and 27. She has possibly fibrocystic breast disease. She has had a previous positive Pap smear and had cryosurgery. She will occasionally get a vaginal yeast infection but only on antibiotics. She has chronic sinus problems, and they get worse during allergy season. She smoked a little bit in nursing school but otherwise has been free of that habit. She has tinnitus. She had bronchitis x 1 in the past, and she had pneumonia as a child. She possibly may have had Chlamydia and has a history of herpes as well. She has thyroid problems with hypothyroidism and takes a low dose of Synthroid. Interestingly, her grandmother, mother and sister all have thyroid problems, rheumatoid arthritis, and fibromyalgia. She has had quite an exposure to birds. She had a parakeet as a child for six months and it died on a corn flake. Her brother had about 7 pigeons for about 8 months that they used as homing pigeons. Next door to her house lived her grandfather, and he had about 100 chickens that he kept, and from the age of 0 to 14, she was exposed to them. They played a lot in the chicken coup, and they would also catch the chickens to put them into the cages to send them off to the slaughter house. She had a cat from the age of 22 to 37, and it did eat birds. She has had 3 dogs, all Labrador retrievers, and is not really sure that they caught birds at all. She was around cows also at her grandfather’s, he had about 25 of them, and 6 pigs. She doesn’t have any implants. 

Basic Diagnoses

    1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis (right side worse than the left side) and articular disc dislocations with reductions
    2. Anterior vertical maxillary excess
    3. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
    4. Transverse maxillary deficiency
    5. AP mandibular deficiency
    6. Anterior teeth bite
    7. Class II occlusion 
    8. High occlusal plane angle
    9. Tooth-size discrepancy of about 2 mm
    10. Reverse curve of Spee in the upper arch
    11. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 3 mm (normal 11 mm)
    12. Hypertrophied turbinates
    13. Deviated nasal septum
    14. Chronic rhinitis
    15. Nasal airway obstruction
    16. Clenching and bruxism
    17. Tinnitus

Recommended Treatment

    1. Presurgical orthodontics 
        A. Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Open up a millimeter of space around each of the upper lateral incisors to help account for the tooth-size discrepancy. Be sure to keep lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally
        B. Continue to align and level mandibular arch

    2. Surgery
        A. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior maxilla superiorly, posterior aspect inferiorly at the level of the occlusal plane, and level the reverse curve of <PERSON>
        B. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
        C. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
        D. Partial turbinectomies
        <PERSON> septoplasty

    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 

    4. Restorative dentistry to build up upper lateral incisors and also to define the mandibular incisal edges



