CHERYL <PERSON>									01/23/2008

<PERSON> is referred by Dr. <PERSON> of Wichita Falls, TX 76308.  She had previous surgeries to include tonsils and adenoids as a child.  She had a tubal ligation in 1984 and uterine fibroid excision in 2005.  She has glaucoma.

    1. Betimol eyedrops.
    2. Xalantan eyedrops.
    3. Amour thyroid 90 mg per day.
    4. Zocor 20 mg per day.
    5. Prozac 20 mg per day. 

    1. Pain.
    2. Discomfort. 
    3. Difficulties chewing.
    4. Neck and shoulder pain and discomfort. 
    5. Grinding of the teeth and jaws at night. 
    6. Overbite relationship.

She would like to be free of pain and discomfort as well as be able to chew better.  <PERSON> is not sure when her TMJ problems began or the etiology.  She has been told by at least a couple of dentists before at least 10 years ago that she had TMJ problems but she was asymptomatic at that time.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus or vertigo.  She is aware of clenching and bruxing at nighttime.  She has no headaches but rates her TMJ at 5, average daily pain at 4, jaw function at 6, diet at 5, disability at 5.  

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.  Maxillary dental midline and chin are fairly well aligned with each other mandibular and dental midline is probably about 2 mm off towards the left side.  In profile view, she has very good balance of the upper lip, cheeks and nose.  <PERSON> appears somewhat retruded and chin-neckline is not well defined.  <PERSON> is retruded probably about 10 to 15 mm.  <PERSON>-neckline is not well defined.  Intraorally, she has her lower teeth back through the second molars except she is missing the left first bicuspid.  She has moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch.  Left cuspid is probably 3 to 4 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the first molars but is missing the second and third molars.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship on the right side but almost a full Class II cuspid relationship on the left side.  She has anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.  The uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars all look relatively normal.  To palpation she has some moderate tenderness over the TMJs.  On jaw function she has some fairly fine crepitus sounds.  Maximal opening is 44 mm.  She can open 38 mm without too much discomfort.  Excursive movements are about 7 mm in each direction.  <PERSON> does relate a traumatic incident.  When she was 6 years old she was hit by a car.  She did hit her jaws in that accident.  <PERSON> does have a decreased oropharyngeal airway and she does state that she has difficulty swallowing pills.  Her husband had to give her the <PERSON> procedure three times.  




<PERSON>				01/23/2008				Page 2
 
Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and maxillary second molars.  The lower arch is also missing the mandibular left first bicuspid.  She has severe arthritis in both TMJs with flattening and loss of vertical volume.  The sinuses look reasonably clear.  She has crowns on most of her maxillary teeth and some of her posterior teeth on the mandible.  

Waters view shows that the septum is fairly straight and turbinates are moderate in size.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows significant arthritis is present.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle is actually postured forward in the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with arthritic changes.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be decreased vertical and posterior joint space.  On opening, there is fairly good translation of both joints.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class II skeletal and occlusal relationship. Slight increased occlusal plane angle.  Oropharyngeal measures about only 6 mm at the base of the tongue but up at the soft palate is measures 11 mm.  

Dental analysis shows that she has about a 3 to 4 mm vertical overbite relationship and about a 3 to 4 mm overjet relationship.  There is crowding in the lower anterior arch.  She has a missing mandibular first bicuspid but has the rest of the lower teeth.  The site of the maxillary right central incisor matches with the midline of the maxillary teeth.  The left mandibular cuspid is probably a good 3 to 4 mm posterior to the right cuspid. 

    1. Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.
    2. AP mandibular deficiency. 
    3. Crowding of lower anterior arch. 
    4. Class II occlusion on the left side and Class I on the right side.
    5. TMJ pain. 
    6. Myofascial pain.

    1. Extract mandibular right first bicuspid. 
    2. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.
        b. Align and level mandibular arch. 
    3. CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol.)
    4. Surgery.
        a. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.
        b. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
    5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 


