MICHAEL JERINA									11/19/2008

Mike is 30 years old.  Referred by Dr. <PERSON>.  Primary concerns <PERSON> has is that teeth do not fit together properly.  He has no TMJ issues nor airway problems.  He does have some mild snoring, but no evidence of sleep apnea symptoms. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is zero on the left side and 1  mm on the right.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The mandibular dental midline is 2 mm to the right, but the chin is pretty much on the facial midline.  In profile, <PERSON> has fairly good facial balance.  Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  He has appliances on and the teeth look nicely aligned and leveled.  In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back through second molars present.   He has a slight Class III relationship on the right side by probably only about 2 mm as well as on the left side maybe 3 mm.  He has an end-on incisor relationship and has a right-sided posterior crossbite.  <PERSON> has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side.    Oropharyngeal tissues all look healthy and normal.  Intranasally, the turbinates may be mildly to moderately enlarged.  The septum may be deviated off towards the right side, but there is no distinct nasal airway obstruction.  <PERSON> has no tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Joints function smoothly.  Incisal opening is 57 mm.  Excursion movements are about 8 mm in each direction.  He has no joints involved, but his knees bother him and he bases that on banging them because of his height of 6 feet 10 inches and hitting his knees just getting around. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  No pathology is seen.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows what appears to be reasonably good anatomy in the joints.  He has got a moderately steep articular eminence.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows relatively normal joint anatomy.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  
Waters view shows he does have a deviated nasal septum and a small bone spur off to the right side.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  Both sinuses appear a little bit full.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that <PERSON> has an end-on incisor relationship and a slight Class III occlusal relationship.  Oropharyngeal airway is about 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 6 to 7 mm at the base of the tongue.  He does hold his tongue relatively low  as there is a distance of probably 12 to 13 mm from the top of the tongue to the palatal level. 


    1. Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.
    2. Mandibular deviated prognathism. 
    3. Slight Class III occlusion (3 mm).
    4. Anterior and right side cross bites.
    5. Tooth size discrepancy with a  difference of about 2 mm related to the increased labial-lingual thickness of the maxillary incisors. 


    1. Presurgical orthodontics.  
        <PERSON> to align and level maxillary arch.  Keep the lateral incisor roots tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to provide room for interdental osteotomies.
        b. Continue to align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.
    2. Surgery.
        a. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline.  
        b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to expand it, advance it slightly, and reestablish normal vertical overbite relationship.   
3.   Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.


