DANA <PERSON>										08-18-03

<PERSON> is 17 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 6 <PERSON> Dr., San Rafael, CA  94901.

Patient History

<PERSON> is in good health with no major medical problems. She takes no medications. She does have difficulties breathing through her nose, and she has frequent congestion and gets frequent colds. 

She has been under orthodontic treatment on and off since kindergarten. She initially had some expansion of the maxilla. At one point she had a pretty good bite relationship when she was 15. Since then, the lower jaw has continued to grow, and she has redeveloped a Class III jaw relationship. Of interest is that she has an aunt and five cousins who have the same kind of facial profile. She also has an uncle who has mandibular prognathism as well. <PERSON> has a hearing impairment where she cannot hear certain frequencies, but it is not a specific frequency factor. She has no particular problems with earaches except for about two months ago she developed some pain in her left ear, but that cleared up and went away. She has no tinnitus or vertigo. She states she has no headache problems and has no really significant pain problems in her TMJ area. She has no pain on a daily basis. She rates TMJ and overall pain at 0, jaw function at 1, diet and disability at 0. 

Patient Concerns

    1. Teeth don’t fit together
    2. Excessive lower jaw growth
    3. Significant difficulties breathing through her nose

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Nasal dorsum is a little bit wide. The media crura of the right lower lateral cartilage is significantly inferiorly positioned compared to the left side by probably a good 3 mm. Upper lip length is about 17 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 1 mm. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines are pretty much aligned to the facial midline as is the chin. She has some slight AP deficiency in the maxilla. Nasal tip hangs down lower than the columella by probably 3 to 4 mm. Holding the nasal tip up does improve her profile some. Mandible appears to be in fairly good AP position. Chin-neckline is relatively normal in length, and chin-neck angle is fairly well-defined.

Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars present. Teeth are fairly well aligned and leveled. Roots are fairly prominent. Fairly thin attached gingiva particularly around the lower central incisors. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars present. She has almost an anterior crossbite present. Class III end-on occlusion on the left side by about 3 mm. On the right side, it is a little bit less, maybe only a couple of millimeters.

Intranasally, her septum is deviated off toward the right side causing some obstruction there. <PERSON> are somewhat large particularly on the left side. Columella base is wide. Nostrils are a little bit narrow. Holding the nostril open, she could breathe somewhat better through her nose. <PERSON> appears clear. 

To palpation, she has no pain around the head and neck area. Right joint seems to function relatively smoothly. The left side has some crepitation in it on opening. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm. Excursive movements to the right and left are 6 mm in each direction.
<PERSON>’s analysis reveals a 2-mm tooth-size discrepancy.

<PERSON> does have scoliosis and has a double-S curvature and is relatively mild and is stabilized. She has a cousin who has a history of rheumatoid arthritis. In the seventh grade, <PERSON> did wear a facemask with it sitting on her forehead on her chin for protraction of the maxilla. She recalls that this is when she became aware of having some clicking noises in the left jaw joint.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth, but the maxillary right third molar and bilateral mandibular third molars are impacted. Right mandibular third molar is erupted. Sinuses look clear. Right turbinate looks a little bit enlarged. <PERSON> look relatively normal. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has decreased anterior joint space. Articular eminence is moderately steep. <PERSON> looks funny, and difficult to identify some of the cortex.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that seems to have fairly good morphology. Moderate steepness to the articular eminence. Joint space seems a little bit decreased vertically. 

On open views, there is good translation of both condyles. Joint space seems fairly thin bilaterally in the open views.

Waters view shows the sinuses are clear. Septum has some deviation to it. Turbinates appear a little bit enlarged, and there does not appear to be a really good airway.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the patient has her teeth apart slightly, and so she is not in maximal occlusion. Appears to have a prominent mandible. <PERSON> could be slightly AP deficient. Upper incisors appear slightly over-angulated, and lower incisors appear a little bit vertical. Has a Class III end-on cuspid relationship.

Basic Diagnoses

    1. AP maxillary deficiency
    2. Mandibular prognathism
    3. Rule out bilateral condylar hyperplasia
    4. Left TMJ articular disc dislocation
    5. Class III end-on occlusion
    6. Anterior crossbite
    7. Low occlusal plane angulation
    8. Impacted mandibular third molars and maxillary right third molar
    9. Erupted mal-aligned maxillary left third molar
    10. Tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of approximately 2.5 mm
    11. Deviated nasal septum
    12. Hypertrophied turbinates
    13. Wide columella base
    14. Nasal airway obstruction
    15. Congenital nasal deformity

Recommended Treatment

    1. Presurgical orthodontics
        A. Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies
        B. Align and level mandibular arch 

    2. Surgery
        A. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward and upright the incisors as well as open up space between the upper laterals and cuspids to accommodate for the tooth-size discrepancy 
        B. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in a clockwise direction and increase the occlusal plane angle
        C. Possible high condylectomies and bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors
        D. Removal of impacted third molars (x 3) and malaligned maxillary left third molar
        <PERSON>
        <PERSON>
        G. External rhinoplasty
        H. Reconstruction of columella

    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion 


