LYNN KINMAN									04/16/2008

    1. Centrum multivitamin.
    2. Fish oil.
    3. Calcium.
    4. Vicodin 7.5 mg p.r.n. severe jaw pain, usually taking 5-7 tablets per week.
    5. <PERSON>.
    6. Aleve 600 mg daily.


CLINICAL EVALUATION.  <PERSON> has good facial symmetry and appears to have good left-to-right facial balance.  Upper lip length is about 25 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 1 mm.  <PERSON> has noticed that her right ear is lower than her left ear and this has been a problem more recently and she has to have her sunglasses adjusted in order for them to fit properly.  In profile view, she has fairly good facial balance.  <PERSON> neckline may be just a little bit short.  For the most part though, facial balance is good AP-wise and vertically.  Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of her teeth back to the second molars.  She has some gingival recession, although she has good attached gingiva.  In her upper arch,, she has all of her teeth back to the second molars as well.  She has crowns on a lot of the posterior molars.  She has a good Class I cuspid-molar relationship.  She has a slight transverse asymmetry with the maxillary right cuspid being about 0.5 to 2 mm higher than the left cuspid.  Oropharyngeal tissues all look normal and healthy.  To palpation, she has moderate pain over the right TMJ and milder pain over the right styloid and right posterior neck area.  <PERSON> has difficulty sleeping on her back because the pressure in the right joint becomes fairly severe.  She feels best sleeping in a semiupright position in a Lazy Boy kind of chair.  When <PERSON> has her splints in place, it causes her to actually clench more which then exacerbates her pain.  


    1. Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with severe degenerative changes.
    2. Right TMJ pain. 
    3. Right-sided headaches.
    4. Right-sided myofascial pain. 


    1. Medications.
        <PERSON> mg q.8 to 12 hours p.r.n. pain. 
        <PERSON> tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet at bedtime. 
    2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
    3. Surgery. 
        a. Right TMJ condylectomy.
        b. Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
        c. Fat graft to the right TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).  
        d. Application and removal of arch bars.
