ALIME (ALLY) KIRDAR							08/10/2011
DOB:	11/20/1966

Ally is 44 years old.  She believes that she has had TMJ and jaw problems for quite a few years.  About 1-1/2 years ago, she had some “poor dental work done” and this has significantly increased her symptomatology.  She has had some dental work on her anterior teeth.  She has had no previous orthodontics.  She has all of her teeth present back through the third molars.  She has really had no treatment to date.  


    1. Facial asymmetry.
    2. Headaches.
    3. Headache and jaw pain.
    4. Changing of the occlusion.

Based on the photographs, her ears are covered so it is difficult to tell the orientation of her head.  When asked if she has any aesthetic concerns, it is predominantly the facial asymmetry that bothers her and she does not seem to be too concerned about her profile.  She plans to come for a clinical evaluation and MRI evaluation.  At that time, I will be able to examine her facial balance and, if she is not concerned about the profile, we may like to try to maintain that as best as possible.  She does have some bi-maxillary protrusion, but again if this is not of concern, we would likely be able to treat her orthodontically than with TMJ and orthognathic surgery without extractions.  


    1. Bilateral TMJ pathology (need MRI to determine).
    2. Bi-maxillary protrusion.
    3. Class I cuspid relationship on the left side, Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the right side.  
    4. In frontal view, the mandible more prominent on the right side of the face as compared to the left.  
    5. Transverse cant in the soft tissues of the lips with the right commissure being 3 mm lower than the left side.
    6. On smiling, less elevation of the right commissure compared to the left side.  
    7. Mandibular dental midline is shifted off to the left side about 2 mm.  
    8. <PERSON> of the jaw is present it being shifted off towards the left side 2 mm.  
    9. Malrotated mandibular right second bicuspid.


1.	MRI of left and right TMJ.
2.	Presurgical orthodontics.
	a.	Align and level maxillary arch.
	b.	Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower anterior teeth and 			retract to help correct for a moderate tooth size discrepancy of 1 mm.
3.	Surgery.
	a.	Bilateral TMJ procedures if indicated and dependent on clinical and MRI 			evaluation.
	b.	Possible bi-maxillary surgery to level the transverse facial planes and 			correct the posterior yaw with maximizing the occlusion.
4.	Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  

We will wait to evaluate her and determine precise treatment time and options for her.  
