SCOTT KLEIN									5/16/05

Scott is 47 years old.  He has had his tonsils removed, had his appendix removed and had vocal cord nodules removed.  He also had had surgery for his strabismus.  He had one episode about a year ago of atrial fibrillation.  

    1. Prevacid.
    2. Remicade.
    3. Propecia.
    4. Folic acid. 

<PERSON>			5/16/05					Page 2


Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all four first bicuspids.  Sinuses appear clear.  Turbinates appear moderately enlarged.  

Waters view shows that sinuses are relatively clear except for a little cloudiness in the lateral aspect of the left maxillary sinus.  The septum is reasonably straight.  Turbinates are moderately enlarged.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows the teeth are not quite together all the way.  There is good joint space around the condyle and the condyle appears to have very good morphology.  Articular eminence is fairly steep. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit flattened on the anterior aspect.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  <PERSON> process is fairly prominent.  Joint space appears a little bit increased posteriorly as compared to the anterior joint space which appears perhaps slightly decreased.  On opening, there is actually fairly good translation of both condyles, much better than on the MRI.  The right condyle comes anterior the articular eminence.  The left one just comes forward to beneath the articular eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some AP maxillary and mandibular deficiency probably due to the previous orthodontics.  Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good although there is definite tethering of the soft palate and the fibrous band can actually be seen progressing down into the oropharynx.  This is coupled with the nasal airway obstruction and is probably the primary factors contributing to his residual snoring problems.  Clinically, the soft palate almost appears a little bit short anteroposteriorly.  It does appear to be tethered inferiorly.  His tongue completely fills the oral cavity. 

In profile view the upper lip is 5 to 6 mm AP deficient.  The chin is also AP deficient by probably about 6 to 8 mm.  There is prominent labio-mental fold.  <PERSON>-neckline is essentially nonexistent.  There is a slight cant in the transverse occlusal plane in the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right side.

    1. Right TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
    2. Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction.
    3. AP mandibular deficiency.
    4. AP maxillary deficiency. 
    5. AP macrogenia.
    6. Class I occlusion.
    7. Slight open-bite on the right side posteriorly.
    8. Missing all four first bicuspids secondary to previous orthodontics.
    9. Missing all four third molars.
    10. Hypertrophied turbinates.
<PERSON>				5/16/05				Page 3


    11. Constriction of the luminal valves. 
    12. Sleep apnea symptoms. 
    13. Severe snoring.
    14. TMJ pain.
    15. Myofascial pain. 
    16. Moderately high-occlusal plane angulation. 

    1. Sleep study.

    2. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Apply appliances to the maxillary arch.
        b. Apply appliances to the mandibular arch.

    3. Surgery.
        a. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
        b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.
        c. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the mandible and down graft it posteriorly. 
        d. AP reduction genioplasty.
        <PERSON>. 
        f. Reconstruct bilateral nasal luminal valves.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 
