RACHEL KLENTZ									01-09-03

Rachel is 9 years old, and her birthday was 12/04/93. <PERSON> was referred by Dr. <PERSON>, 6460 Far Hills Avenue, Centerville, OH  45459.

Patient History

Previous surgical procedures that <PERSON> has had include muscle biopsies and a tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. In the past, she has had problems with pneumonia, strep throat, stomach flu problems, and dehydration. <PERSON> has been diagnosed with merosin-deficient muscular dystrophy.


    1. Teeth and jaws don’t line up well
    2. Difficulties eating and chewing
    3. Predominantly mouth breathing particularly when sleeping

She has no problems with pain, headaches, and she has no ear symptoms. She apparently has no apneic episodes while sleeping currently. She did, however, before she had her tonsils and adenoids removed have some significant airway problems. Maxillary dental midline and chin are pretty much aligned to the facial midline. Lower dental midline is shifted about 2 mm off toward the right side. <PERSON> has some significant contractures of her posterior neck muscles that do not enable her to have a normal head and neck type of posture. Her neck is flexed posteriorly significantly, and she postures her head in an upward and forward position. 

Intraorally, she is in a mixed dentition and has retained primary C’s, D’s, and E’s in all four quadrants. Lower cuspids and bicuspids are severely crowded, and she will require extraction, particularly in the lower arch. Extraction in the upper arch of perhaps the second bicuspids may be indicated as well. In the lower arch, probably first bicuspids should be removed to allow eruption of the lower cuspid teeth. <PERSON> has interestingly a Class I molar relationship, but because of the severe crowding in the lower arch, she has a Class II cuspid relationship. <PERSON> appears clear, and soft palate and uvula look relatively normal. <PERSON> has an overjet of 12 to 13 mm and open bite of 9 to 10 mm. Incisal opening is about 28 mm. Excursive movements were about 6 mm in each direction. Jaw joints seem to function relatively smoothly. She has a lot of dried mucus in her nose at this point, so I cannot see posteriorly. Could see a little bit on the right side, and she could have a fairly adequate airway. Left side, though, is completely blocked.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex is somewhat distorted because of movement. She has retained C’s, D’s, and E’s in all four quadrants. In the upper arch, there appears to be adequate space without any significant crowding. In the lower arch, there is severe crowding with the cuspids being blocked almost completely out of the arch. Difficult to evaluate the sinuses or the nasal airway. Difficult to evaluate the condyles. However, they do appear to be intact. 
Right TMJ tomograms show a condyle that appears to have fairly good form to it; however, cortical outline is not as clear as I would like to see. <PERSON> appears to have normal morphology as does the articular eminence. Articular eminence is a little bit shortened in vertical length but not too significantly. Space appears adequate as best I could tell. 

Left TMJ tomogram likewise shows a condyle that may be a little bit flattened on the posterior aspect. Articular eminence is short vertically but of moderate inclination. Joint space appears a little bit thinned on this side. Opening view shows reasonable translation of both joints. Both condyles look a little bit flattened on the posterior head. 

Cephalometric radiograph shows a head and neck posture that shows extreme flexure. She has a fairly severe Class II skeletal and dental relationship. Oropharyngeal airway is quite compromised particularly at the lower aspect of the tongue base where there appears to be less than a millimeter of airway space. On the more superior aspect of the tongue, there is about a 5-mm space. At the soft palate level, there is about a 5-mm airway space. Adenoid tissues appear to be eliminated. Turbinates do not appear too large. Posterior vertical dimension of the posterior choanae is somewhat short vertically. 

Basic Diagnoses

    1. Meroson-deficient muscular dystrophy
    2. Severe AP mandibular deficiency
    3. Transverse maxillary deficiency
    4. Slight vertical maxillary excess
    5. Slight AP maxillary deficiency
    6. Skeletal and occlusal Class II relationship
    7. Anterior open bite of approximately 9 mm
    8. Bilateral posterior crossbites
    9. Accentuated curve of occlusion upper arch
    10. Severe crowding, lower arch
    11. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway
    12. Retained primary maxillary C’s, D’s, and E’s and lower D’s and E’s
    13. Unerupted maxillary and mandibular second molars and developing third molars are present
    14. Severe neck posture possibly attributed to in part to the airway obstruction in the oropharynx

Recommended Treatment

    1. Presurgical orthodontics
        A. Maxillary rapid palatal expansion to try to increase the width of the maxilla
        B. Place orthodontic appliances on the maxillary and mandibular primary and secondary teeth in preparation for surgery

    2. Surgery
        A. Mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction with inverted “L” osteotomies and bone plate stabilization
        B. Release of suprahyoid musculature

        A. Serial extraction of lower primary teeth and extraction of mandibular first bicuspids
        B. Align and level mandibular arch
        C. Remove primary maxillary teeth
        D. Align and level maxillary arch. Consider extracting maxillary second bicuspids if ideal occlusal relationship in the molar area is desired

    4. Surgery at approximately the age of 14 to 15 years (IF NECESSARY)
        A. Mandibular advancement in a counterclockwise direction
        B. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and expand if necessary
        C. Removal of impacted third molars
   
     5.         Post Surgical Orthodontics to finish and retain
