MATTHEW <PERSON>								04-07-03

<PERSON> is 14 years old and referred by Dr. <PERSON>. He is on Legacy Road in Plano. 

Patient History

<PERSON> had his tonsils and adenoids removed approximately five years ago. <PERSON> is in good health with no major medical problems.

Patient Concerns

    1. The fact that the teeth and jaws do not align very well
    2. Difficulties breathing through the nose
    3. Breathes through mouth particularly when sleeping
    4. Occasional popping in the jaw joints
	
Clinical Examination

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 4 mm. Maxillary dental midline and mandibular dental midline are pretty much on the facial midline. <PERSON> is also fairly close to being on the facial midline.

In profile view, <PERSON> has probably some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably 3 to 4 mm. <PERSON> is retruded approximately 20 mm. Lower third face height appears somewhat long. Chin-neckline is extremely short in chin-neck angle although is reasonably defined.

Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth erupted in back through the second molars, although the second molars are not completely in yet and still have some partial soft tissue coverage. Has some significant crowding, lower anterior arch, of about 5 to 6 mm. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth erupted back through the first molars, and the second ones aren’t quite down yet. Has some moderate crowding, upper anterior arch, with the lateral incisors blocked lingually. Has just a slight Class II cuspid relationship on the right side, a little bit greater on the left side. He is probably 3 to 4 mm Class II. Has fairly good attached gingival around the lower anterior arch but has a high labial frenulum by the central incisors. Has a slight open bite of about a millimeter. <PERSON> appears clear. Tonsils are absent. 

He has a wide columella base, making the nostrils somewhat narrow and constricted. Right turbinate is extremely large and is actually touching against the nasal septum. Left turbinate is large but doesn’t contact against the septum itself. 

To palpation, he had no tenderness around the head and neck area. On excursive movements, he had some popping that I originally thought was on the left side but he thought was on the right side. It went away with more excursive movements generated. On opening, the joints seemed to function reasonably smoothly.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four bony impacted third molars. Increased space between the mandibular third molars and the second molars, being a little bit greater on the right side than the left side. Maxillary second molars are unerupted at this time. Third molars are quite high in position. Sinuses look relatively clear. TMJs look relatively normal.

Waters view shows the sinuses appear to be relatively clear. Right turbinate is quite large and appears to obliterate most of the airway. On the left side, the turbinate is large, but there appears to be some airway. Mandible appears might be a little bit shorter vertically on the right side as compared to the left side. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology. Articular eminence is moderately steep. <PERSON> actually is postured forward a little bit and could mean that he was not totally in centric relation when the radiograph was taken. Superior and posterior joint spaces appear to be slightly increased.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology and fossa and articular eminence that are moderately steep. Appears to be increased superior and posterior joint space that also could mean he may be postured forward slightly. Appears to have a fairly large air cell above the roof of the fossa. 

On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles. The condyles look like they have good morphology in the open views. 

Cephalometrically, <PERSON> has a high occlusal plane angle and retruded position of the maxilla. Posterior maxilla appears deficient vertically and anteriorly maybe just a little excessive vertically. Mandible has some fairly significant AP deficiency. Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 5 mm (normal 11 mm). Appears to be some adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx area.

Basic Diagnoses

    1. AP maxillary deficiency
    2. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency
    3. AP mandibular deficiency
    4. Class II end-on occlusion
    5. High occlusal plane angle
    6. Developing bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations
    7. Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars
    8. Unerupted maxillary left and right second molars
    9. Tooth-size discrepancy with a <PERSON>’s difference of 1.5 to 2 mm
    10. Significant crowding, lower anterior arch of probably 6 mm
    11. Mild crowding, upper anterior arch
    12. Slightly accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch
    13. Hypertrophied turbinates
    14. Wide columella creating narrow nostrils
    15. Nasal airway obstruction
    16. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal 11 mm)
    17. AP microgenia

Recommended Treatment

    1. Consider extractions of maxillary and mandibular second bicuspids ONLY if extractions are required in the lower arch to properly align the teeth and to keep from flaring them excessively forward

    2. Presurgical orthodontics
    A. Align and level maxillary arch
    B. Align and level mandibular arch. Strip lower anterior teeth, removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the significant tooth-size discrepancy and also to help prevent excessive flaring of the lower incisors forward

    3. MRI of left and right TMJs to be taken in approximately one year

    4. Surgery
    A. Consider bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors if disc displacement is confirmed by MRI
    B. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward, correct the accentuated curve of <PERSON>, and correct any transverse problems that may develop
    C. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction
    D. Bilateral inferior partial turbinectomies
    E. Surgical removal of impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4
    F. HTR implant to anterior mandible 
    <PERSON> columella reconstruction

    5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

