JOHN <PERSON> 							10/7/05

John is 18 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON>, Plano, Texas.  <PERSON> is in good health with no major medical problems.

PRIMARY CONCERNS
    1. Teeth and jaws do not line up well and do not fit together properly.
    2. Difficulty breathing through the nose.
    3. Predominately a mouth breather.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.  There may be a little bit of increased fullness at the angle in the area of the right side but not too significant.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  <PERSON> may be just a couple of mm off to the left side.  In profile view, <PERSON> has some AP maxillary deficiency probably about 5 mm.  The chin also appears to be probably 4 to 6 mm AP deficient.  <PERSON>-neckline and chin neck angles are not well defined.  <PERSON> has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  Some very minimal crowding in the lower anterior arch.  The lower teeth appear to be in slight lingual inclination.  Slightly reverse curve of <PERSON> at the 4 incisors.  In the upper arch, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back through the second molars.  He has anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.  He is about 2 mm Class III on the left side, 4 mm Class II on the right side.  His incisors hit just about end-on but a little anterior crossbite present.  He has zero overbite relationship.  <PERSON> has a slight transverse cant to the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm higher than the right side in both the upper and lower arch.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  The uvula is mildly hyperplastic but not too significant.  The soft palpate and faucial pillars look normal.  Intranasally, <PERSON>'s septum is deviated off towards the right side.  The right turbinate looks somewhat inflamed and appears to almost touch against the septum.  On the left side, the turbinate looks healthier and is smaller in size and there appears to be an adequate airway at least in the front part of the nose.  The incisal opening is 53 mm.  Excursive movements are 7 mm in each direction.  No tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  TMJs function smoothly.  

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of impacted maxillary third molars and an erupted right third molar but the left third molar apparently has not formed.  The sinuses look fairly clear.  The septum may be a little bit deviated.

Waters view show that the sinuses are clear including the frontal, ethmoid and maxillary sinuses.  The nasal septum appears to have a spur off of the superior side back in the bony area.  The right turbinate appears a little bit larger than the left turbinate though there may be some airway at least back in the bony area.  Anteriorly the septum deviated off to right side might cause some airway obstruction. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good form.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.  There appears to be good joint space around the condyle.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence may be slightly steeper on this side as compared to the opposite side.  The joint space appears to be adequate but difficult to tell on this x-ray.  Open view shows good translation of both condyles.  


<PERSON> 		10/7/05					Page 2


Lateral cephalometric radiographic shows that there is some AP maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency.  Probably a skeletal Class III occlusal relationship is present.  Oropharyngeal airway appears constricted with the airway at the soft palate level being only about 3 to 4 mm and at the base of the tongue it is about 7 mm.  He appears to have an increased occlusal plane angle.  There is a vertical difference at the inferior border of the mandible.  <PERSON> has a tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 3 mm.

BASIC DIAGNOSES
    1. AP maxillary deficiency.
    2. Transverse maxillary deficiency.
    3. AP mandibular deficiency.
    4. High occlusal plane angle.
    5. Class III end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared to the left side.
    6. Decreased oropharyngeal airway with AP dimension of 3 to 4 mm at the soft palate level (normal 11 mm.)
    7. Hypertrophied turbinates.
    8. Nasoseptal deviation and spurs.
    9. Nasal airway obstruction.
    10. Predominately mouth breather.
    11. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of 3 mm.
    12. Impacted maxillary third molars and erupted maligned mandibular left third molar. 
    13. Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 2 mm lower than right side.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
    1. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip laterals incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Open up space around the upper lateral incisors to equal 1 mm around each tooth.
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  Use Class III elastics on the right side and Class II elastics on the left side to try and improve the asymmetry in the lower arch where the left cuspid is about 2 mm posterior to the right cuspid.  He should only need these elastics for a couple of months to correct that situation.
    2. Surgery.
        a. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, level it transversely and correct any transverse discrepancies.
        b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a slight counterclockwise direction.
        c. Bilateral partial turbinectomies.
        d. Nasoseptoplasty.
        e. Removal of impacted maxillary third molars and malaligned erupted mandibular right third molar. 
    3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

