JACOB LARGE									8/31/05

Jacob is 7 years old, referred by Dr. <PERSON> in Paris, Texas.  <PERSON> was born with a bilateral cleft lip and palate.  He has had a very nice repair on his lip and also on his palate.  <PERSON> had a Latham device placed to help control the maxillary segments prior to closure of the cleft lip.  The cleft lip was repaired at the end of June of 1998.  The palate was repaired.  He had two procedures done on the palate because there was a breakdown with the first procedure and second procedure had to be performed.  All the procedures were essentially complete by the time <PERSON> was 2 years old.  <PERSON> had a lot of middle ear problems and has had numerous tubes placed in his ears with the last ones being a permanent one and these have been in for about 2 to 3 years.  <PERSON> does have some velopharyngeal incompetence and hypernasal speech quality.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
    1. Difficulty breathing.  He has to breathe predominantly through his mouth because he cannot get air through his nose.  He like likes to play sports but when he does and he is running or playing hard, he has to hold his tongue out of his mouth in order to breathe adequately.  
    2. Dental and teeth problems.

<PERSON> has been doing speech therapy since he has been about 3 years of age and he is receiving it at his school.  <PERSON> is in the second grade and he loves school.  

Clinical examination shows that <PERSON> has repaired bilateral cleft and palate.  He really has a nice repair for a single procedure.  <PERSON> has good facial symmetry and fairly good vertical dimension.  In profile, <PERSON> has good facial balance.  He has some fullness at the base of the nose but actually has pretty good AP projection of the upper lip.  When he smiles, there is some increased fullness in the upper lip probably secondary to excessive thickness of tissues and scar tissue in the area that does not allow it to flatten out in a normal manner.  Intraorally, his permanent central incisors are erupting in but has the rest of his primary teeth including Bs, Cs, Ds and Es.  Mandibular left first molar is starting to erupt through.  In the upper arch, the premaxilla is shifted off towards the right side.  He has the 2 central incisors in that segment.  He has retained C, D and E bilaterally.  The Ds have crowns on them.  He is getting a lateral incisor that is erupting in but directed posteriorly in the premaxilla.  He appears to have oral nasal fistulas still present around the premaxilla but no large continuity defects.  The palate is repaired and it has turned out very nice.  Even the uvula has fairly good shape and appears bifid.  <PERSON> has an anterior deep bite of about 5 to 6 mm.  He has bilateral posterior crossbites.  He appears to have a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally.  There is fairly good movement of the soft palate.  Nasally, he has a wide columella and significant constricture of the nostrils.  The luminal valves are somewhat constricted.  I cannot see back in to evaluate the turbinates as there is too much debris anteriorly in the nose.  He has been diagnosed as being ADHD and takes Ritalin 10 mg twice a day.

<PERSON>'s previous surgeries were performed by Dr. <PERSON>, 1444 NW 14th Ave., Miami, FL 33125, phone number 305-325-1300.  <PERSON> has been seen also by Dr. <PERSON> at 214-456-8888.

JACOB LARGE				8/31/05				Page 2


RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the presence of all of her lower teeth including the developing second molars.  In the upper arch, it appears that he is missing the lateral incisors or either has a lateral incisor developing on the left premaxillary area or the supernumerary teeth.  It appears that his 2 central incisors are primary teeth.  There may be one large central incisor developing in the premaxilla.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  TMJs appear reasonable in shape and size.  

Waters view shows that the septum has a little bit of deviation to it.  The right inferior turbinate appears quite large and appears to obliterate most of the nasal airway.  On the left side, the turbinate is not quite as large.  This still seem to occupy a good portion of the airway.  The sinuses look relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  The joint space may be a little bit decreased vertically.  Articular eminence is relatively shallow.

Left TMJ shows a condyle that has reasonable morphology.  It appears that the joint space is little bit better balanced on this side compared to the other side.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the premaxilla is a little bit forward.  There is a central incisor in the premaxilla as well as the 2 primary teeth.  There appears to be a predominately slight skeletal Class II relationship.  Adenoid tissue present in the nasopharynx but is not very large compare to <PERSON>'s age.  There is a slight increase in occlusal plane angle but not too bad.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good though it is a little bit decreased at the inferior aspect at the base of the tongue.  Vertical and anteroposterior facial proportions look reasonable.  On the lateral cephalogram it appears that there is some room between the top of the tongue and the hard palatal area.  He does not have a macroglossia contributing to the situation.  

Dental model analysis in conjunction with radiograph shows that it appears that the permanent central and lateral incisors are in position but the Cs, Ds and Es are primary teeth.  The permanent successors are developing appropriately beneath the primary Cs, Ds, and Es.  In the upper arch, Cs, Ds and Es have permanent successors developing above those teeth.  It appears that there may be a supernumerary tooth in the right cleft area and also in the left side of the premaxilla.  It is possible that one of the teeth could be a horizontally developing lateral incisor or small central incisor. 

While cleaning out <PERSON>'s nose of some dry mucous, he seems to have a reasonable airway through his nose.  At least anteriorly, the turbinates do not look that large but difficult to get a very good view because of the constricture of the nostrils themselves and the wide columella.  
JACOB LARGE
August 31, 2005
Page 3


BASIC DIAGNOSES
    1. Repaired bilateral cleft and palate.
    2. Maxillary transverse hypoplasia.
    3. Slight vertical maxillary hypoplasia.
    4. Bilateral alveolar maxillary clefts.  
    5. Bilateral posterior crossbites.
    6. Class II end-on occlusion.
    7. Anterior deep bite.
    8. Mixed dentition with currently mandibular 4 incisors erupted in and the mandibular left first molar is just beginning to erupt.  All the other teeth appear to be primary teeth.
    9. Unerupted maxillary central incisor.
    10. Possible horizontal erupting central incisor with a crown that is coming out through the left side of the premaxilla.
    11. Possible missing bilateral lateral incisors. 
    12. Wide columella. 
    13. Constricting nostrils.
    14. Problems with developing internasal debris.
    15. Nasal airway breathing problems.
    16. Mild velopharyngeal incompetence and hypernasal speech quality. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
    1. Continue to observe dentition particularly to monitor for the dental caries or periodontal problems.
    2. Continue to monitor growth and development.
    3. <PERSON> evaluations to monitor growth and development. 
    4. Serial extractions if they become necessary to get the permanent teeth to erupt in, in an orderly and timely fashion.  
    5. Consider bilateral maxillary alveolar cleft grafting as the permanent cuspids develop more and the eruption pattern approaches the alveolar cleft area.  
    6. Presurgical orthodontics. 
        a. Align and level maxillary arch. 
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.
    7. Surgery.
        a. Probable maxillary osteotomies to expand it and correct any anterior, posterior or vertical discrepancies that may exist at that time.
    8. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.  

