ANDREW LAVAN									10/4/05

Andrew is 16 years old, referred by <PERSON>, DDS, 10 Broadway, Denville, NJ 07834.  Phone 973-625-4917.  <PERSON> is in good health with no major medical problems.  

PRIMARY CONCERN:  Jaws do not line up and fit together very well.

<PERSON> has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, hearing loss, headaches or TMJ pain.  He has a little problem with his right knee occasionally but no other joints are of concern.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

In frontal view, <PERSON> has some slight dystopia with the left eye being probably a couple mm higher than the right.  Upper lip length is about 19 mm.  Upper tooth to lip relationship is 0.  Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm off to the right.  <PERSON> is about 5 mm off to the right.  He does have some scleral show of about 2 mm with each eye.  In profile, he has some deficiency in the upper orbital area of about 5 mm.  He has some slight nasal dorsal hump.  Upper lip appears real short in the AP position.  The chin actually appears slightly retruded.  <PERSON>-neckline and chin-neck angle are fairly well defined and formed.  There is AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 4 to 5 mm.  Intraorally, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back through the second molars present.  In fact, he has his third molars erupted in, in all 4 quadrants.  <PERSON> has had extensive orthodontic treatment including first phase and second phase.  He has had braces on for probably 3 to 4 years and then had them off and just got them back on in June of this year.  <PERSON> has a full Class II occlusion on the right side and a super Class III occlusion on the left side.  <PERSON> has a reverse overjet of about 8 mm.  He has an open bite of about 2 mm.  He has an anterior crossbite but maxilla has been extended so that posteriorly there does not appear to be a crossbite. Oropharynx tissues appear healthy.  He has a huge uvula, but soft palate length and faucial pillars appear relatively normal.  Intranasally, the septum has few little turns in it but nothing real significant.  For the most part it is relatively normal.  The turbinates are probably mildly enlarged but there does appear to be adequate airway.  To palpation, <PERSON> has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  Joints are a little bit noisy particularly on the left side and I suspect that he probably has displaced discs.  He actually makes more noise on closing where the condyle appears to come off of the disc. This possibly could be medially displaced.  He has no tenderness or pain with the situation.  The maxilla transversely is relatively level.  The mandible is down a little bit on the left side 1 to 2 mm.  As <PERSON> shifts his mandible about 3 mm to the left, this significantly improves overall facial symmetry.  There is a tooth size discrepancy with <PERSON>'s difference of 1.5 mm. 

Analysis of lateral cephalometric radiographs taken 3/6/1997, compared to 5/10/2001, compared to 6/30/2005, indicate the maxilla appears to be growing relatively normal although clinically it may appear a little bit deficient.  The mandible has an excessive amount of growth.  In the past 4 years, the mandible has grown forward almost 21 mm.  He has a twin with a Class III jaw relationship as well as an uncle and a cousin.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION 
Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth including the third molars that have erupted in.  Sinuses appear relatively clear as best as they can be seen.  Joints cannot be evaluated very well. 

<PERSON>				10/4/05				Page 2


Waters view shows large frontal sinuses but the sinuses all appear to be clear.  The sinuses are quite large in the ethmoid area.  There may be some slight asymmetry in the jaws.  Turbinates appear moderate in size with the right one a little bit larger than the left one.  The septum appears fairly straight and the airway appears adequate.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows that there may be diminished superior and posterior joint space.  The condyle appears slightly wide anteroposteriorly but difficult to tell.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with reasonable morphology.  There may be decreased superior and posterior joint space.  Relatively shallow articular eminence.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles.  

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows there is still a significant amount of adenoid tissue remaining in the nasopharynx area.  The posterior choanae area appears somewhat constricted.  The soft palate appears somewhat short in length.  Good airway space is present at the soft palate and base of the tongue and appears somewhat narrowed at the nasopharyngeal area.  <PERSON> has a Class II skeletal relationship and high occlusal plane angle and high mandibular plane angle facial morphology. 

BASIC DIAGNOSES
    1. Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia. 
    2. Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation.
    3. Severe mandibular prognathism.
    4. AP maxillary deficiency. 
    5. Transverse maxillary excess. 
    6. Class II occlusion on the right side, super Class III occlusion on the left side.
    7. Mandible deviated off to the right side 3 mm.  
    8. Mild crowding of lower anterior arch. 
    9. Over-angulated maxillary incisors.
    10. Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.
    11. Hyper-eruption of mandibular left second bicuspid.
    12. Presence of erupted malaligned third molars.  
    13. Anterior open bite. 
    14. Nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue.
    15. Nasal airway obstruction due to above.
    16. Hypertrophied uvula.
    17. Snoring.
    18. Increased curve of Wilson upper arch. 
    19. Tooth size discrepancy with a <PERSON>'s difference of approximately 2 mm. 
    20. High occlusal plane angle.  
    21. Masticatory dysfunction. 

<PERSON>				10/4/05				Page 3


RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
    1. MRI of left and right TMJs. 
    2. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.  Place the vertical step in the arch wire so that the 4 incisors are elevated and aligned at a level approximately 2 to 3 mm higher than the cuspids and posterior teeth.  Try to vertically level the posterior 5 teeth on each side. 
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  Slenderize the lower incisors removing approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to correct the tooth size discrepancy and to keep from tipping the incisors any further forward. 
        c. Try to depress the left second bicuspid as it is elevated above the adjacent teeth.
    3. Surgery.
        a. Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies. 
        b. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
        c. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to reposition the mandible posteriorly and decrease the occlusal plane angle.
        d. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward slightly and down graft it posteriorly.  
        <PERSON> adenoidectomy.
        f. Extract malaligned maxillary mandibular third molars.
        <PERSON>.
        h. Bilateral infraorbital/malar augmentations.
        i. Grafting intraorbital and malar area.
    4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

