<PERSON> 12/07/2011

<PERSON> is 16 years old. Birth date 02/16/1995. He was referred here by Dr.
<PERSON>, 8100 Lomo Alto Drive #204, Dallas, <PERSON>,
phone #214-363-8893, an orthodontist over at the medical school. <PERSON>’s
orthodontics for the first phase from the age of 12 to 14 and they were
put back on when he was 15 and he currently has the devices on.

Alex has no problems with headaches. He rates his TMJ pain at 2, facial
pain and headaches at 0, jaw function at 3, diet at 1, disability at 3.
He has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss and
no other joints bother him. He is not aware of clenching or bruxing at
night. He breathes well through his nose and does not snore but does
have some mild daytime tiredness.


1.  Jaws get tight after chewing.

2.  Left side gets locks and has to be maneuvered to open.

3.  Right side gets locked as well.

4.  Pain in the left TMJ area.

In frontal view, <PERSON> has good facial symmetry and balance. He has a
slight masseteric hyperplasia on the left side. Upper lip length is
about 26 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about 5 mm. The maxillary,
mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial
midline. In profile view, he has just some slight hypoplasia in the
infraorbital area. The maxilla is AP deficient by probably about 3 to 4
mm. The chin is retruded about 18 mm and chin neckline is extremely
short, although the chin neck angle is well defined. Intraorally, <PERSON>
has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars. The teeth
appear to be nicely aligned and leveled. He has adequate attached
gingiva. In the upper arch, <PERSON> has all of his teeth back through the
second molars present. He has about a 2 mm vertical over bite. He has a
Class I cuspid relationship with just a slight open bite in the left
cuspid-bicuspid area. Arches are fairly level transversely.
Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. Intranasally,
the septum appears to be deviated significantly off to the left side and
appears to obstruct against the left turbinate which is moderately
enlarged. The right side airway appears fairly open. To palpation, <PERSON>has no tenderness around the head and neck area. His maximal incisal
opening is 34 mm with excursion movement to the right 5 mm and to the
left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of all four third
molars that may be still soft tissue impacted or could possibly be just
slightly erupted through in the mandible. The sinuses appear clear. The
septum is deviated significantly off towards the left side. Difficult to
evaluate the joints.

Coronal view shows that the bony septum posteriorly is fairly straight.
Left inferior and middle turbinates are quite enlarged and the right
side appears relatively normal in size. Sinuses appear relatively clear
with just some very slight thickening of the sinus membrane in the left
sinus floor.

Axial view shows that the nasal septum anteriorly is deviated
significantly off to the left side almost against the lateral nasal wall
area. The turbinate is moderately enlarged on that side and, with the
septal deviation and spur sticking off the left side as well as the
enlarged turbinate, the left side of the nose appears to be
significantly obstructed. The right side appears wide open.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a little bit of
flattening on the top of the condyle and there is a little bit of
anterior beaking present. The joint space may be slightly narrowed
posteriorly. The articular eminence has a moderate inclination but
relatively short in vertical height.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to have a little
bit better quality of bone across the top of the condyle. There is
anterior beaking present. The joint space may be slightly decreased. The
articular eminence has a moderate inclination. It is a little bit longer
in length than the left side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that does not appear to have real
strong cortical bone across the top of the condyle. There is decreased
vertical and lateral joint space. The lateral rim of the fossa curves
inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a decreased joint space particularly at the
lateral aspect of the joint. The lateral rim of the fossa curves
inferiorly about 4 to 5 mm.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla is AP and
posterior vertical deficient, but the maxilla is vertically elongated.
The mandible is retruded. Occlusal plane angulation is moderately steep.
Oropharyngeal airway measures about 5.5 mm at the soft palate level and
about 7.5 mm at the base of the tongue.


1.  Bilateral TMJ anteriorly displaced discs non-reducing,

2.  Maxillary anterior vertical hyperplasia but posterior vertical and
    AP hypoplasia.

3.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

4.  High occlusal plane angle.

5.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 5.5 mm
    (normal AP dimension 11 mm).

6.  Hypertrophied left nasal inferior turbinate.

7.  Nasal septal deviation off to the left side.

8.  Impacted third molars x4.


1. Presurgical orthodontics: Continue to align and level the maxillary
and mandibular arches.

2. Surgery.

a. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
Mitek anchors.

b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a
counterclockwise direction.

c. Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a counterclockwise
direction.

d. Left nasal reduction turbinectomy.

<PERSON> septoplasty.

f. Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

g. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the chin.

3. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
