MARIE ODOM 06/27/2007

Marie is 65 years old referred by Dan Clifford, DDS, 7520 Montgomery
N.E. Bldg D, Ste. #2, Albuquerque, NM. Marie reminded me that she had
come to see me about 22 years ago for a second opinion. Her history
involves developing TMJ problems when she was about 19 years old
following removal of her tonsils. This was in 1960. Her condition
progressed on and then finally in 1985 she had bilateral TMJ surgery
that included placement of either Proplast Teflon implants in her joints
versus Silastic. She developed worsening problems and in 1987 those
implants were removed and bilateral TMJ dermal grafts were placed. These
have not done well. She has been in splint therapy since the late 80s
and currently still wears a splint. She has been through physical
therapy, acupuncture, and craniosacral therapy.

In 1979, Marie was in an auto accident and had a severe whiplash injury
that has caused some of the damage to her neck area. Also, when she was
19, she was living with her aunt and the aunt had closed the door that
normally was not closed and Marie was running through the house at night
and ran into the door with her face and actually knocked the door out of
the frame.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS

1.  Excedrin 2 to 3 per day.

2.  Ibuprofen 2 to 4 per night.

3.  Coreg 3.125 mg q.h.s.

4.  Lexapro 10 mg q.h.s.

5.  Nutrilite Double X supplement.

6.  Nutrilite Bone Health.

7.  Nutrilite Omega-3 complex.

8.  Nutrilite B complex and garlic.


1.  Depression.

2.  Trigger points.

3.  Fibromyalgia.

4.  Right side occipital nerve damage.

5.  Arthritis in the spine and occipital area.

6.  Digestive problems.

PAST HISTORY/PREVIOUS SURGERIES: Significant bout of pneumonia 1944. She
had her tonsils removed in 1960, hysterectomy in 1972, previously
mentioned TMJ surgeries and then gallbladder removed in 2000.


1.  Bilateral severe TMJ pain.

2.  Pain in both eyes.

3.  Loss of chewing abilities.

4.  Loss of voice and singing abilities.

5.  Lack of quality of life.

6.  Pain and headaches in the base of the skull and temporal muscle
    areas.

MARIE ODOM 06/27/2007 Page 2

7.  Equilibrium problems.

8.  Sleep apnea problems.

Marie has some significant snoring problems, daytime somnolence and
sleep apnea. She has had a sleep study but she is not sure how accurate
it was at the time because of some equipment failure. She does have a
CPAP machine. She has difficulty sleeping at night that is moderate to
severe but this is dependent on the level of pain that she has. She does
wake up occasionally at night unable to catch her breath. She does have
high blood pressure but she does not smoke.

Marie rates her headaches at a level of 10 and these occur in the
forehead, temple area and back of the head as well as she gets pain
through her eyes. She rates her TMJ pain at 10, average daily pain at
10, jaw function at 8, diet at 9 and disability at 9. Marie does get
earaches on the left side. She gets occasional tinnitus and she gets
frequent vertigo. Other joints that bother her include her right
shoulder, right knee, hips, SI joint and spine. She also has problems
with her left elbow. She is receiving cold laser treatments. She had
significant trigger point injections, probably 100s of them. Marie has
generalized pain throughout her body probably related to fibromyalgia.
She does clench some at night.

In frontal view, Marie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is –1.
Maxillary midline and mandibular dental midline is pretty much on the
facial midline. Chin may be just slightly to the right side maybe a
couple of mm. In profile view, Marie has some slight AP maxillary
deficiency maybe 2 to 3 mm. Chin appears retruded by probably 10 to 12
mm. Intraorally, Marie has her lower teeth back through the second
molars present. She has some moderate crowding in the lower anterior
arch. She has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch she has all
of her teeth back through the second molars as well. Basically a Class I
cuspid molar relationship. She has about a 2 mm vertical overbite
relationship. The uvula is a little bit elongated. Soft palate appears
elongated. Faucial pillars may be moderately constricted. Tonsils are
gone. Intranasally, turbinates appear moderate in size. The septum is
deviated a little bit off towards the left side. Airway, however,
appears adequate. Sometimes during the day other people will catch Marie
holding her breath and they will have to remind her to breathe. If Marie
tries to eat anything she gets pain line a bone shooting up through her
skull. Maximal incisal opening is 39 mm but she can open to about 30 mm
without severe pain. Excursive movements are about 3 mm in each
direction. To palpation she has high moderate to severe pain around the
masseters, TMJs, styloid areas, moderate pain around the medial
pterygoids, posterior neck and shoulder areas and mild tenderness over
the SCMs and temporalis area. Marie has had rhizotomies to some of the
cranial nerves in the back of her neck and this has helped her pain
through her neck and shoulder areas. This was done only on the right
side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Panorex shows the absence of all 4 third molars. She has crowns on the
lower first molars. Sinuses appear clear. Turbinate is deviated off
towards the left side in the bony area. Turbinates appear moderate in
size. Both condyles appear quite arthritic. The right condyle appears
enlarged with the growth off the front part of it whereas the left
condyle appears small in size.

MARIE ODOM 06/27/2007 Page 3

Waters view shows deviation of the nasal septum off towards the left
side in the bony area. Sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram is a little bit foggy in the joint area indicative of
likely probably bone-on-bone contact.

Right TMJ tomogram likewise shows significant loss of joint space.
Articular eminence appears fairly steep. There could very well be
bone-on-bone contact on this side as well. On opening, there is some
translation on the left joint but on the right side there is very
minimal translation movements.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has very good AP
dimension in the airway. It is possible she may have been somewhat in a
functional mode when this x-ray was taken. Otherwise, she appears to be
in a fairly good Class I skeletal and occlusal relationship. Clinically,
her soft palate appears much longer than it does in this particular
radiograph. Marie says that she does have difficulty swallowing.

When Marie was 2-1/2 years old, she developed a severe case of pneumonia
and they thought she was going to die. They had to drain her lung cavity
surgically. She was placed on sulfa drugs and lost her hair, her tongue
turned black and hands turned black. She lost a lot of her motor skills
and she los her memory and basically had to start all over again in her
learning process.

BASIC DIAGNOSES

1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.

2.  Severe TMJ pain.

3.  Severe headaches.

4.  Significant jaw dysfunction and masticatory difficulties.

5.  Hyperplastic soft palate and uvula.

6.  Sleep apnea.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT

1.  Consider evaluation at the Environmental Center of Dallas to rule
    out hypersensitivities to materials to be used in the prostheses
    including possible material samples implanted into the forearm.

2.  CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
        prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen.)

    c.  Application and removal of arch bars.

    d.  Postsurgical physical therapy as necessary to maximize jaw
        function.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
