PAM SMITH 08/23/2006

Pam is 38 years old, referred by Dr. Larry Byrd, 7660 Woodway, Ste. 325,
Houston, TX 77063. Pam's problems in her joints probably began back when
she was a teenager as her mother recalls her complaining of popping at
that time. Things may have become much worse in about 1993. TMJ problems
no hearing loss. Other bones that bother her include her neck and right
hand. She is aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime.

Previous treatment includes orthodontics as a teenager and then she has
had splint treatment beginning about 10 years ago that has been on and
off.


1.  Trazodone 50 mg at bedtime.

2.  Valium 2.5 mg at bedtime.

3.  Flonase nasal spray.

4.  Birth control pills.

She gets headaches about every 10 days that escalates to about a level
of 10 that are predominately in the right temple and posterior head
area. She gets severe pain at a level of 10 in the TMJs but not
everyday. Some days her pain level is only about a level of 1. Average
daily pain and headaches is 2, diet is 2 and disability is rated at 3.
She says her headaches are a level of 10 in the temporal and posterior
head and neck area. She used to get headaches two to three per week
prior to her current splint therapy.


1.  Difficulty swallowing with a feeling of choking.

2.  TMJ pain.

3.  Headaches.

4.  Bite is off.

5.  Earaches and ringing in the ear as well as lightheadedness and
    dizziness.

In frontal view, pam has fairly good symmetry in the middle and upper
third face with significant asymmetry in the lower third face. Upper lip
length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is probably 2 mm.
Maxillary midline is probably a good 2 mm off to the right side.
Mandibular dental midline is about 3 mm off to the right side. Chin is
probably about 6 to 7 mm off to the right side. Mandibular dental
midline and chin are fairly close to being on the facial midline. In
profile view, Pam has fairly good balance between the upper lips, cheeks
and nose. Chin appears somewhat retruded although the chin neckline
actually looks reasonably good in length. The chin may be about 10 mm AP
deficient. Pam has a head postured forward neck position. Intraorally,
Pam is missing lower first bicuspids but has the rest of her teeth. Some
moderate crowding in the lower anterior arch. Appears to have good
attached gingiva. In the upper arch she is missing first bicuspids as
well. She has an end-on Class II occlusion being about 2 mm Class II on
the left side and probably 4 to 5 mm Class II on the right side. She has
an anterior deep bite of 5 to 6 mm. Pam has a significant shift in
transverse occlusal plane with the right side being about 4 mm shorter
than the left side.

PAM SMITH 08/23/2006 Page 2

Uvula, soft palate and faucial pillars are all within normal limits.
Intranasally, the septum is deviated off to the right side with some
spurring. Right turbinate is a little bit large and significantly
decreased oropharyngeal airway is present. The left turbinate appears
relatively normal in size and there appears to be good airway on the
left side. To palpation, she has no tenderness around the head and neck
area. Joints seem to function smoothly. Excursive movement to the right
about 9 mm, left 10 mm.


Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars and all first
bicuspids. The sinuses appear relatively clear. The left condyle appears
large with a little notch in the posterior head of the condyle. The left
side appears to have undergone significant resorptive and degenerative
changes.

Waters view shows that the bony nasal septum does have some deviation.
The sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear moderately
enlarged with the right side appearing larger than the left side.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is broad anteroposteriorly. Joint
space, however, seems to be fairly well balanced. Articular eminence is
moderately steep.

Right TMJ shows severe osteoarthritic changes in the condyle and joint.
The condyle is posteriorly positioned in the fossa. On opening, there is
good translation of both joints but significant difference in the size
of the condyles can be appreciated.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a skeletal Class II
relationship with some vertical asymmetry. Oropharyngeal airway that the
tip of the soft palate measures about 6 mm and the base of the tongue
about 7 mm.


1.  Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation being
    nonreducing and with severe deformation.

2.  Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc dislocation at the
    lateral aspect of the joint.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

5.  AP mandibular deficiency.

6.  TMJ pain.

7.  Headaches.

8.  Myofascial pain.

9.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

10. Class II occlusion.

11. Anterior deep bite.

12. Missing all four first bicuspids from previous orthodontic
    treatment.

13. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm.

PAM SMITH 08/23/2006 Page 3


1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Open up spacing around the upper
        lateral incisors to equal 1 mm on each side to correct for the
        tooth size discrepancy. Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and
        cuspid roots distally to facilitate interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concept protocol.)

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Right TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Left TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
        Mitek anchor.

    c.  Left mandibular sagittal split osteotomy to advance the mandible
        on that side.

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down
        graft it posterior.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Restorative dentistry to place bonding or Veneers on the maxillary
    lateral incisors to eliminate the spacing created to correct the
    tooth size discrepancy.
