ROBIN WOOD 04-15-02

Robin is 38 years old and referred by Dr. Sharon Ornstein.

Patient History

Robin’s problems began in about 1991. She had a laparoscopic procedure
done for endometriosis, and following that, she began with clicking and
popping in her jaw joints. She also developed headaches. In 1992, she
was in an MVA and sustained a whiplash injury. She has been on at least
a couple of different kinds of splints. In April of 1999, she had
bilateral TMJ arthroscopy by Dr. Jim Bates. She began her orthodontics
in July of 1999 with Dr. Claude Stephens (511 W. Wheatland Road,
Duncanville, TX 75116). She has been to see many doctors in reference to
her current problem.

Robin has had a hysterectomy in June of 2001 secondary to endometriosis
problems.

She gets frequent earaches, frequent ringing her ears, and she is
sensitive to noise. No other joints both her. She is allergic to
PENICILLIN but has no other known allergies and no problems with
jewelry.

She wakes up hurting in the mornings, and then things usually get worse
for her. She rates her headaches at a level of 5. They are continuous in
the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area and also on top of the
head. She rates her TMJ pain as 7, overall pain as 7, jaw function,
diet, and disability at 5.

Current Medications

The only medication she takes currently is Cenestin, which is a hormone
medication.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Robin has good left to right facial symmetry. Upper lip
length is 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3 mm.
Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on the facial midline.
Mandibular dental midline and chin are shifted about 1.5 mm off to the
left.

In profile view, Robin has some AP maxillary deficiency of maybe about 3
to 4 mm. Chin is retruded approximately 15 mm. Chin-neckline is short
and not well-defined. Nasal dorsum is a little bit prominent. There is a
little bit of ptosis of the nasal tip.

She is missing lower first bicuspids that were extracted when she had
orthodontics as a teenager. She appears to have adequately attached
gingiva, although it is quite thin. In the upper arch, she is also
missing first bicuspids extracted at her first round of orthodontics.
She has an open bite of about 1 mm and an overjet of probably about 4 to
5 mm. She has a Class II end-on occlusion with the left side being worse
than the right side. Clinically it appears that there is probably a
tooth-size discrepancy.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Left TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation with
    adhesions to the articular eminence with reduction on opening.

2.  Right TMJ severe arthritis and articular disc dislocation without
    reduction and severe deformation.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

5.  AP mandibular deficiency.

6.  Class II occlusion.

7.  Anterior open bite of 1 to 2 mm.

8.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

9.  Headaches.

10. TMJ pain.

11. Myofascial pain.

12. Missing all four first bicuspids extracted for previous orthodontic
    treatment.

13. Significant tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton difference of 3 mm.

14. High occlusal plane angulation.

15. Severe decrease of oropharyngeal airway of 2 mm (normal 11 mm).

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch.

    B.  Continue to align and level lower arch. Strip lower anterior
        teeth removing approximately 3 mm of tooth structure if possible
        and close spacing and retract.

2.  CT scan of TMJ and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

3.  Surgery

    A.  Bilateral TMJ condylectomies, meniscectomies, debridement, and
        reconstruction with mandibular advancement using TMJ Concepts
        total joint prostheses.

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward
        and downgraft it posteriorly.

    C.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

    D.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen).

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
