BILL NOBLE 11/01/2007

Bill is 51 years old. The primary concern he has involves some sleep
apnea and snoring issues. He has no apparent TMJ problems. He is aware
of clenching and bruxing. His medications include Excedrin Migraine and
Cozaar. He has had previous orthognathic surgery. He had a Leforte I
osteotomy to expand the maxilla to correct the crossbite by Dr. Kevin
McBride. He has also had orthodontics x3. The surgery was performed
sometime around 1980 or 1981. Bill has had some implants performed and
some extensive dental work.

In frontal view, Bill has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about

30 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about –4 mm. Maxillary midline
is pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline and chin
are shifted off towards the right side probably 1 mm at the dental
midline and probably 3 to 4 mm at the chin. In profile view, Bill has
some AP deficiency of the maxilla probably 3 to 4 mm. Chin is retruded
about 15 to 18 mm. Chin-neckline is not well defined. Intraorally, Bill
is missing lower first bicuspids that were taken out for previous
orthodontic reasons. He has a crown on mandibular left first molar. The
rest of the teeth are present and fairly well aligned. He has good
attached gingiva. He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch.
Transverse width of the mandible appears to be a little bit constricted.
In the upper arch Bill is also missing the first bicuspids. He has
implants replacing all four incisors. The incisors look a little bit
small. He is basically pretty much to a Class I on the left side with
Class II end-on on the right side in the cuspid area by about 3 mm.
There is an anterior vertical overbite of about 1.5 mm. Bill actually
has all four of his third molars erupted into position. It appears that
he likely has a tooth size discrepancy due to some small upper incisors.
Bill has no tenderness around the head and neck area to palpation.
Joints function smoothly. Maximal incisor opening is about 55 mm.
Excursive movements are about

9 mm in each direction. There is a slight cant in the occlusion with the
right side being about

1 mm higher than the left side. There is just a slight crossbite
tendency posteriorly around the right second or third molar. He has a
slightly open bit tendency in the bicuspid area bilaterally. The uvula
is a little bit elongated. The soft palate appears a little bit
elongated and the posterior airway dimension seems somewhat constricted.
Faucial pillars may be mildly constricted but not too severe.
Intranasally, the septum is fairly straight although it may be just
slightly off to the left side. The turbinate is a fairly good size.
Transverse width of the nose is probably a little bit greater than
normal but the turbinates are quite large and may cause some obstruction
particularly at night when Bill feels that he does breathe more through
his mouth. Bill describes his snoring as probably severe. He does not
really experience daytime somnolence. He occasionally will wake up
unable to catch his breath. He has difficulty sleeping at night.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:

Panorex shows that he is missing all four first bicuspids. He has an
implant replacing the maxillary left central incisor and maxillary right
cuspid. He has crowns on his four incisors and also the right cuspid. He
has a root canal in the maxillary right central incisor. Sinuses appear
relatively clear. The right condyle appears a little bit larger than the
left one.

BILL NOBLE 11/01/2007 Page 2

Waters view shows that he has significant sinusitis on the right side
with most of the sinus obliterated. The left sinus appears clear as do
the rest of the sinuses. The bony septum is deviated a little bit off to
the left side. Turbinates actually do not appear so bad in size and
there appears to be adequate nasal airway.

Left TMJ tomogram is a little hard to evaluate. The condyle appears to
have reasonably good shape. Articular eminence is moderately shallow.
There appears to be adequate joint space although posteriorly it may be
a little bit narrow.

Right TMJ condyle appears a little bit larger in size. Joint space seems
fairly well balanced except a little bit decreased posteriorly.
Articular eminence is moderately shallow. On opening there is good
translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is some vertical
maxillary deficiency relative to upper lip length. There is a decreased
oropharyngeal airway of only about 4 mm at the soft palate level. It
seems more constricted at the base of tongue. There are double images of
the posteropharyngeal wall and with the anterior part of the double
image the airway dimension is only about 2 mm. A little bit lower down
it measures about 6. This may indicate some transverse narrowness of the
oropharyngeal airway.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:

1.  Vertical maxillary deficiency being worse posteriorly and
    anteriorly.

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  AP mandibular deficiency.

4.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 4 mm
    (normal 11 mm.)

5.  High occlusal plane angle.

6.  Missing four first bicuspids.

7.  Hyperplastic elongated soft palate and uvula.

8.  Severe snoring.

9.  Replacement of maxillary left central incisor and maxillary right
    cuspid with osteointegrated implants.

10. Sleep apnea syndrome.

11. Right maxillary sinusitis versus mucous retention cyst.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.

2.  CT scan versus i-CAT scan of sinuses.

BILL NOBLE 11/01/2007 Page 3

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla about 6 mm and down
        graft it posteriorly about 8 mm.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        forward approximately 15 mm.

    c.  Consider UPPP procedure.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

At this point in time Bill is not interested in pursing the surgical
approach but the plan he would like to follow is as follows:

1.  Weight reduction to see if he can decrease his high blood pressure
    as well as decrease his sleep apnea symptoms.

2.  Consider use of CPAP machine to help control sleep apnea.

3.  If successful with weight management and outcome, but snoring still
    present, then proceed on with a UPPP procedure.

4.  If weight reduction does not alleviate sleep apnea symptoms, then
    the surgical options previously outlined would be available.
