JOEL PASEK 09/20/2007

Joel is a patient of Dr. Warner Young, 8299 161St Ave., NE #201,
Redmond, WA, 98052. He is a 16-year 1 month old male with a Class III
occlusal relationship. His records were sent by Dr. Young for
evaluation.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:

1.  Rule out condylar hyperplasia.

2.  Mandibular prognathism.

3.  Slight AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Transverse maxillary excess.

5.  Multiple diastemas around the upper anterior teeth and between the
    lower cuspids and first bicuspids.

6.  High occlusal plane angle.

7.  Slight over angulation of maxillary incisors.

8.  Tooth size discrepancy of 3 mm secondary to small upper lateral
    incisors.

9.  Impacted third molars x4.

10. Anterior crossbite.

11. Open bite tendency.

12. Large turbinates.

13. Rule out nasal airway obstruction.

14. Slight accentuated curve of Wilson in the lower posterior arches.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Close midline diastema but
        maintain 1.5 mm of spacing around each upper lateral incisor
        distributed evenly, mesially and buccally to the lateral incisor
        (this is to compensate for the tooth size discrepancy.) Tip
        lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make
        room for interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Consider buccally uprighting
        the posterior teeth a little bit to help level the accentuated
        curve of Wilson.

2.  Continue to monitor growth and develop to evaluate for active
    condylar hyperplasia.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral high mandibular condylectomies with articular disc
        repositioning to eliminate the active condylar hyperplasia.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible back
        in a clockwise direction to level the occlusal plane.

    c.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly, down graft it
        posteriorly and upright the four incisors as well as correct any
        transverse discrepancies in the arch.

    d.  Surgical removal of all four bony impacted third molars.

    e.  Bilateral inferior turbinectomies if the patient has nasal
        airway obstruction.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
