MATTHEW PITTS 09-13-04

DOB: 08/21/86. He is 18 years old.

Patient Concerns

1.  Jaws are retruded

2.  Teeth don’t fit together properly

Patient History

Matt has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss,
no myofascial pain problems, no headaches, no TMJ pain, and no TMJ
noises. Matt has been under orthodontic treatment for some time. He has
had four first bicuspids extracted, and the spaces have been closed. He
takes no medications. He has a little bit of problem with his right
shoulder but otherwise has no other joint problems.

Clinical Examination

Joints seem to function very smoothly. Incisal opening is 50 mm.
Excursive movements to the right are 8 mm and to the left 7 mm. Upper
lip length is 21 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 2 to 2.5
mm. Mandibular dental midline may be shifted about a mm to the left of
the maxillary midline, although the chin midline is fairly close to
being on the facial midline. Has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship
and has an overjet of about 4 to 5 mm. Oropharynx appears clear. Uvula
is a little bit hyperplastic but not too significant. Faucial pillars
are a little bit narrow transversely but again not really significant.
Intranasally, appears to have adequate airway. Reports no problems with
snoring, daytime somnolence, or sleep apnea.

In profile view, his maxilla appears to be retrudced about 4 mm.
Mandible is retruded about 10 to 12 mm.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of four impacted third molars and the absence
of four first bicuspids. Sinuses are clear, and condyles look relatively
normal.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be well inserted into
the fossa with good joint space and relatively good morphology.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be well inserted into
the fossa with good joint space and relatively good morphology.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows some AP maxillary deficiency and
AP mandibular deficiency. Slightly increased occlusal plane angle.
Overjet of about 4 to 5 mm is present. The impacted third molars can
also be noted. Oropharyngeal airway looks very good.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  AP maxillary deficiency

2.  AP mandibular deficiency

3.  Class II end-on occlusion

4.  Four to 5-mm overjet

5.  Impacted maxillary and mandibular third molars x 4

6.  Missing four first bicuspids

7.  Moderately high occlusal plane angle

Recommended Treatment

1.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch

2.  Surgery

    A.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward about 4 mm
        and downgraft it 2 to 3 mm posteriorly to level the occlusal
        plane

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction

    C.  Removal of four impacted third molars

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
