LINDA RAU 10/31/2007

DOB: 03/08/1949

PREVIOUS SURGERIES:

1.  Sternum for sarcoidosis.

2.  Gallbladder removal.

3.  Shoulder manipulation.

She has been diagnosed as having sarcoidosis, mitral valve prolapse,
rheumatoid arthritis, hypothyroidism and asthma.

CURRENT MEDICATIONS:

1.  Spiriva.

2.  Advair.

3.  Synthroid.

4.  Maxzide.

5.  Cytotec.

6.  Naproxen.

7.  Aspirin.

Her pain problems began earlier this year. By radiographic evaluation
she has had long-standing TMJ issues that apparently have been
relatively asymptomatic until more recently. She gets noises in her
joints that she states are like popping and grinding. She has pain
predominately in the left TMJ. She rates her average TMJ pain on a daily
basis at 6, average daily pain at 5, jaw function and diet at 5,
disability at 1. She rates her headaches at a level of 5 in the frontal
and temple areas. She has crepitus in both TMJs. Historically, Linda
states that when she was in high school she remembers episodes of having
a closed lock situation that occurred in her jaws and she had to
manipulate her jaws to get it open. However, her pain problems did not
really begin until early in 2007 where she became aware of gravely kind
of sounds originated initially in the left side but now also involving
the right side.

In frontal view, Linda has fairly good left to right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 3.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much along the facial midline
as is the chin. Mandibular dental midline is probably a couple of mm off
to the right side. She does have some significant crowding. This may
throw her maxillary midline off to the left just a touch. In profile
view, she has a little bit of an obtuse nasal labial angle. Maxilla may
be retruded 3 mm or so. The mandible is retruded by about 15 to 20 mm.
Chin-neckline is extremely short and chin-neck angle is not defined.
Intraorally, Linda has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. She has significant crowding in the lower anterior arch. She has
good attached gingiva around the lower anterior teeth. In the upper arch
she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She has crowns
on the right first and second molars. There is some mild crowding in the
upper anterior arch. She has Class II end-on cuspid relationship on the
right side by probably about 4 mm and likewise on the left side of 4 to
5 mm. She has an overjet of probably about 3 mm. She has about at 6 or 7
mm vertical overbite relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively
normal. There may be some mild constricture of the faucial pillars.
Nasal airway looks fairly clear.

LINDA RAU 10/31/2007 Page 2

The turbinate on the right side may be just slightly larger than the
left side but there still appears to be good airway. She has some mild
snoring but no daytime somnolence or sleep apnea symptoms. To palpation,
Linda has some moderate tenderness over the masseter muscle and some
milder tenderness over the TMJs. She has significant crepitation in both
TMJs with it being actually audible on the left side. Maximal incisal
opening is about 38 mm. Excursive movement to the right is about 6 mm
and to the left 9 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION"

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars. There are a lot of
restorations on the posterior teeth extending from the second bicuspids
through the molars. The condyles appear somewhat arthritic with the left
side appearing smaller in size than the right side. The sinuses appear
relatively clear.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is fairly straight. Turbinates
are moderate in size. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears somewhat sclerotic and
there appears to be decreased joint space. Articular eminence is
moderately steep.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears arthritic. Articular
eminence is moderately steep. Some anterior beaking is present and there
is decreased vertical joint space. On opening, there is some restricted
translation of the right condyle compared the left side but both
condyles come down beneath the articular eminence.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Linda has some AP maxillary
deficiency and some significant AP mandibular deficiency. She has a high
occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway actually looks fairly good
with just some restriction at the base of the tongue. She may have some
increased anterior mandibular vertical height. Linda does report having
a Cockatiel bird that they took care of for about 5 years, roughly 1986
through 1991 or 1992. The bird finally died that may have been due to
could exposure. In 2005, she had an asthma attack and a lung infection
where she lost her voice for about 9 months.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:

1.  Bilateral TMJ rheumatoid arthritis.

2.  AP mandibular deficiency.

3.  AP maxillary deficiency.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.

5.  High occlusal plane angle.

6.  Class II end-on occlusion.

7.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal dimension of 11.)

8.  TMJ pain.

9.  Headaches.

10. Myofascial pain.

11. Severe crowding of lower anterior arch.

LINDA RAU 10/31/2007 Page 3

12. Moderate crowding of upper and arch.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:

1.  Distraction osteogenesis of the mandible.

    a.  Placement of appliance.

    b.  Vertical midline osteotomy.

    c.  Initiation of distraction appliance 10 days postsurgery with
        expansion of the lower arch of approximately 8 mm.

    d.  Hold expansion for four months.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  CT scans of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol.)

4.  Surgery stage 2.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prosthesis.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Augmentation genioplasty.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
