VICTOR ROSE 07-19-02

Victor is 20 years old and referred by Dr. Duane Keller. His address is
3929 Bayless Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63125

Patient History

Victor has had some previous surgeries including on his toenails, hernia
repair, and some major bowel surgery. He also has had urethra and kidney
surgery. He had some oral surgery for exposure of a tooth to try to pull
it down into position. He has had problems in the past with asthma but
not much problem with that now.

Victor has been aware of having jaw joint problems for about a year
though he has been told it may have been present for longer than that.
The etiology is really unknown except the onset he feels was related to
his work doing construction. In the past, he has had a history of
headaches, neck, shoulder, back pain, TMJ pain, clicking and popping,
etc. He has been in a splint for six months now, and he has also had
physical therapy for six months. He takes no medications. He has no
earaches, tinnitus, or vertigo. Other joints that bother him are
occasionally his knees, ankles, toes, and elbows.

He currently rates his headaches at a level of 2. They are predominantly
in the frontal and temple area. Prior to receiving the splint, his
headaches were 8 to 10. TMJ pain currently is about 3 but before his
splint was about 8. Overall pain now is about 2 but prior to the splint
was a 9. With his splint, his jaw function is a 0, diet at 1, disability
at 6.

Clinical Evaluation

In frontal view, Victor has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about 1. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines and chin midline are
all pretty much on the facial midline. Victor has fairly good balance
between the upper lip, cheeks, and nose. Mandible appears prominent.
Chin-neckline is a little bit long. Chin-neck angle is well defined.
Could not handle more than 1 to 2 mm of maxillary advancement.

Intraorally, Victor has all of his teeth back through his third molars
present. He has some mild crowding, lower anterior arch. Has adequate
attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he has all of his teeth back
through the third molars. Has a full Class III cuspid relationship
bilaterally. Has anterior and bilateral posterior cross-bites. Has a
reverse anterior deep-bite of 3 mm. He probably has a good 10 mm AP
discrepancy between the maxilla and mandible. Oropharynx appears clear.
He does have a hyperplastic uvula. Does have a history of snoring.

Intranasally, he does have a deviated nasal septum off towards the left
side. Turbinates appear hyperplastic on the left side only, and this is
probably causing him some significant airway obstruction, particularly
on the left side.

To palpation, he has some mild tenderness over the styloid areas and
SCMs and also some mild tenderness over the right TMJ. Joints seem to
function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 60 mm,
excursive movement to the right 8 mm, and to the left 9 mm. Joints seem
to function relatively smoothly at this time.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of all the teeth. Sinuses look reasonably
clear as best they can be seen. Left nasal airway looks more obliterated
as compared to the right side.

Right TMJ tomograms reveal the condyle is hard to see but can see it in
one view. There is a decreased joint space but difficult to tell. The
styloid process is prominent. Another x-ray shows the condyle has been
postured forward in the fossa. Slightly increased posterior joint space.

Left TMJ tomogram shows some flattening of the anterior head of the
condyle. Moderate steepness of the articular eminence. Joint space does
look a little bit increased. Open views show good translation of both
condyles.

Waters view shows what appears to be a pretty reasonable nasal airway.

Cephalometric evaluation shows good oropharyngeal airway and Class III
skeletal relationship. Slight transverse cant of occlusion with the
right side being about 1 mm to 1.5 mm higher than the left side. In a
Class I position, Victor still has posterior crossbite tendencies.
Because of the tooth-size discrepancy with a small upper left lateral
incisor, it is difficult to get the midline lined up because the upper
right lateral incisor is larger than normal and the left one is smaller.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

2.  History of bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocations.

3.  Severe mandibular prognathism.

4.  Maxillary AP and transverse hypoplasia.

5.  Class III occlusion.

6.  Anterior and bilateral posterior cross-bites.

7.  Accentuated curve of occlusion, lower arch.

8.  Mild crowding, lower anterior arch.

9.  Slight overangulation of maxillary incisors.

10. Excessive large maxillary right lateral incisor and excessively
    small left lateral incisor.

11. Malaligned bilateral maxillary and mandibular third molars.

12. Hypertropied left turbinate.

13. Left nasal airway obstruction.

14. Headaches.

15. TMJ pain.

16. Myofascial pain.

Recommended Treatment

1.  Remove splint to see if TMJ symptoms recur

2.  If TMJ symptoms recur, get MRI before reapplying splint

3.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Reduce the size of the maxillary
        right lateral incisor and open up space around the left lateral
        incisor. Include second molars in the orthodontic appliances.
        Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to
        make room for interdental osteotomies.

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch. Consider stripping lower
        anterior teeth, removing approximately 1.5 mm of tooth structure
        to keep from flaring them forward and to correct for the
        tooth-size discrepancy.

4.  Reassess facial growth and development to determine if condylar
    hyperplasia is active

5.  Surgery

    A.  Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc
        repositioning with ligament repair with Mitek anchors.

    B.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible
        posteriorly.

    C.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly but
        transversely expand it.

    D.  Left partial inferior turbinectomy.

    E.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy.

    F.  Extract maxillary and mandibular third molars.

6.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
