LUZ SCHAIBLE 02-20-03

The patient was referred by Dr. William Hang. He only sent records, and
I’m doing a workup from the records. I also made a phone call to her on
02/20/03. Luz is 32 years old.

Patient Concerns

The main problems she has are as follows:

1.  Wearing down of her teeth

2.  Extremely short roots particularly in the upper anterior teeth

3.  Headaches

4.  Teeth don’t fit together well

Patient History

Luz’s headaches began in her teenage years while she had her braces on.
She has been to see apparently a number of doctors, and no one has been
able to figure out what is causing her headaches. Her headaches got
worse in her early 20s. She did have her orthodontics from ages 12 to
15, and the appliances were removed in 1984. She takes Advil Migraine
medication but no other meds. She had earaches, tinnitus, and occasional
vertigo. She usually wakes up with her headaches in the morning, and
that is present almost every morning, and she sometimes gets the
headaches in the late evening or at bedtime. Her husband has observed
her with nighttime grinding of her teeth. Other joints that bother her
include her knees, and she wasn’t sure about her back whether that was
muscular or bony. She is allergic to SULFA, and she is lactose
intolerant. She cannot wear cheap jewelry.

To palpation, she had no particular tenderness over the temporalis
muscles, masseters, or TMJs at this time. In jaw function, she is not
aware of any noises in her joints. She has no TMJ pain, and she says her
average pain during the day is at about a level of 1. She rates her jaw
function at 0, diet at 2, and disability at 0.

In 1992, she had a thyroidectomy, and in 1996, she had a rhinoplasty.

Basic Diagnoses

Based on the available records that included clinical photographs,
lateral cephalogram, Panorex, and dental models, Luz’s diagnoses are as
follows:

1.  AP maxillary deficiency

2.  Vertical maxillary deficiency

3.  Class III end-on occlusion

4.  Anterior crossbite

5.  Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of at least 2 mm

6.  Extremely short roots, upper anterior teeth

7.  Accentuated curve of occlusion, upper arch

8.  Slightly increased curve of Wilson

9.  Vertical over-closure of the jaws and lips

10. Missing all four third molars

11. Root canal on mandibular left first molar and mandibular right
    central incisor

12. Slight AP prominence of the mandible due to vertical over-closure

13. Headaches

14. Nocturnal clenching and bruxism

15. Attrition of the incisal edges of the maxillary four incisors

16. Possible periapical lesion at the base of the central incisors

Recommended Treatment

1.  Place on Klonopin 0.5 to 1 mg q.h.s. to control nocturnal clenching
    and bruxism

2.  MRI of left and right TMJs to rule out articular disc dislocations

3.  Evaluate possible lesion at the apex of the central incisors

4.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip maxillary incisor roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally

    B.  Align and level lower arch. Strip lower anterior teeth removing
        approximately 2 mm of tooth structure to help correct for the
        tooth-size discrepancy

5.  Surgery

    A.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance and downgraft the
        maxilla with bone plate stabilization and hydroxyapatite
        grafting

    B.  Consider TMJ treatment if indicated based on MRI findings

6.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion
