MIA VENO 10/09/2006

Mia is 14 years old, referred by Dr. Clay Pickering, Denton, TX. Mia has
had her tonsils out and she had some juvenile polyps that she had
removed from the rectal area. She has had some tubes in her ears as
well. She has a history of exercise-induced asthma but this past year
has done very well and has not required any medications.

Mia does have some snoring at night when she sleeps. She also has some
pain in the right jaw joint although not real severe. Her joint problems
as far as she is aware began this year. She does get headaches at about
a level of 7. She gets headaches 3 to 4 days per week and they usually
occur on top of her head. The headaches can go through the temple area
and also into the frontal area. For the headaches she takes Tylenol or
Aleve. She does get earaches occasionally. She rates her headaches about
a level of 7 in the frontal, temporal and particularly on the top of the
head where they most commonly occur. She rates her TMJ pain at 1,
average daily pain at 3, jaw function, diet and disability at 0.

On frontal view, Mia has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and
upper third face. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth to lip
relationship is about 2 mm. Maxillary dental midline is pretty much on
the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 1 mm off
towards the right side. Chin is about 2 to 3 mm off to the left side. In
profile view, she has fairly good facial balance. There is a little bit
of fullness in the submental area. Intraorally, she has all of her lower
teeth back through the second molars. A little bit of crowding in the
lower arch on the right side that may account for some of the dental
midline shift. The lower incisors appear a little bit in lingual
inclination. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through
the second molars. There is just a slight Class III cuspid relationship
on the right side and she has posterior crossbite on the left side
involving the second bicuspid and the molars. She has a transverse cant
in the occlusal plane with the right side being about 2 mm lower than
the left side. On the right side, the mandibular cuspid may be about 3
mm compared to the left side. Intraorally, she has huge hypertrophied
tonsils with the right one being significantly larger than the left one
almost going to the midline. This could be the major contributing factor
to her snoring. She has had an adenoidectomy previously performed. The
soft palate appears relatively normal in length but the faucial pillars
are severely constricted again as a result of the hypertrophied tonsils.
Intranasally, she has deviated nasal septum off towards the left side.
Turbinates appear relatively moderate in size. There appears to be
decreased functional airway on the left side as compared to the right
side. I can only evaluate the turbinates anteriorly and could not see
them at the posterior aspects. Anteriorly in her dentition she has a 2
mm vertical overbite relationship. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm.
Excursive movements are 9 mm in each direction.

Dental model analysis of models taken in February of 2005 shows that she
has posterior crossbites on the left side in the first molar and on the
right side in the second bicuspid area. In addition, she has a tooth
size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm. She has some
crowding in the lower anterior arch on the right side and has a
mandibular midline shift to the right about 1 mm. She has a slight Class
III cupid molar relationship.

MIA VENO 10/09/2006 Page 2

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION:

Mia has 4 impacted third molars. She has an enlarged condyle on the
right side. The mandible on the right side may be just slightly
elongated by a couple of mm. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates
appear moderately enlarged.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Some significant asymmetry
in the mandible with the right side being a little bit lower than the
left side. Nasal septum may be deviated just a little bit to the left.
It appears to have adequate airway on the right side of the nose but the
left side may be a little bit blocked.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology.
Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be good joint
space between the condyle and the fossa.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is enlarged with anterior
projection. The condylar neck appears a little bit increased in width.
The joint space otherwise looks reasonably good. On opening, there is
good translation of both condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there is a little bit
difference in vertical height at the inferior border of the mandible
about 4 to 5 mm. Otherwise, she is basically a Class I cuspid molar.
Oropharyngeal airway looks adequate.

BASIC DIAGNOSES:

1.  Right mandibular condylar osteochondroma.

2.  Right mandibular hyperplasia.

3.  Right maxillary vertical hyperplasia.

4.  Slight Class III occlusal relationship.

5.  Crowding in the lower anterior arch.

6.  Mandibular dental midline shifted 1 to 2 mm to the right with the
    chin shifted 2 to 3 mm to the left.

7.  Nasal septal deviation.

8.  Severely hypertrophied tonsils.

9.  Oropharyngeal airway obstruction.

10. Snoring.

11. Headaches.

12. Impacted third molars x4.

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Open about 1 mm space around
        each of the upper lateral incisors. Tip the lateral incisor
        roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
        interdental osteotomy.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

MIA VENO 10/09/2006 Page 3

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Right mandibular low condylectomy and articular disc
        repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchor.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to transversely level the
        maxilla, expand it and increase the occlusal plane angle
        slightly.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomy to shift the mandible onto
        the facial midline.

    d.  Surgical removal of 4 bony impacted third molars.

    e.  Consider nasal septoplasty.

    f.  Consider partial turbinectomies.

    g.  Bilateral tonsillectomies (by Dr. Weprin.)

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
