DEBORAH VERDIN 03/06/2008

Date of Birth: 02/29/76. Referred by Dr. William Hang, 101 N. Westlake
Blvd., Suite 202, Westlake Village, California 91362. Deborah has been
under orthodontic treatment for a few years with Dr. Florman in Santa
Monica, California. Her bite is still off. She has seen a surgeon who is
going to advance her mandible and then put a big chin implant in. I told
her we had a basic plan worked up to treat her. The biggest concern,
however, is the status of her TMJ joints. She has no particular issues
with her joints symptom-wise, but some of the tomograms from Dr. Hang’s
office shows that there is decreased joint space. I strongly recommended
that we get an MRI of her TMJs to help finalize the treatment plan for
her. Suggest that she come here so I could evaluate her and also get the
MRI done, but she would prefer to get the MRI done in California and
will do a workup long distance. She will contact me if she has any
questions. Will then prepare a letter of preauthorization for her once I
get the MRI.

Basic diagnoses for Deborah would be as follows:

1.  AP maxillary deficiency.

2.  Posterior vertical deficiency.

3.  AP mandibular deficiency.

4.  AP microgenia.

5.  Mild occlusal plane angle.

6.  Class II end-on occlusion.

7.  Impacted maxillary third molars x2.

8.  Rule out TMJ problems.

9.  Overangulation of lower incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  MRI of left and right TMJ.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Open slight space between the
        upper right lateral incisor and cuspid of about 1 mm.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
        teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure and retract.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ surgery if indicated based on MRI analysis.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction moving the incisor tooth about 4 to 5
        mm and down grafting the posterior aspect 6 mm.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction approximately 16 to 18 mm.

    d.  Augmentation genioplasty of approximately 6 mm.

    e.  Surgical removal impacted maxillary third molars x2.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
