MARLENE WALKER 10/25/2005

Marlene is 74 years old and referred by Dr. Tom Walsh from Coeur d'
Alene, Idaho. Marlene has had previous problems with TMJ, sinus, neck,
shoulder and back. She had an ovarian cyst removed in 1960 and a
hysterectomy in 1962. She had her gallbladder taken out in 1985. She had
an angiogram in 1991. For the most part she is in reasonable health. She
has hypothyroidism. She has had some reactions to medications including
Biaxin, Cipro and Ketek. Her TMJ problems began probably in the 1970s.
She states she was in an MVA in the 1960s, but I am not sure whether
that contributed to her joint problems or not. She was treated by Dr.
Slack in Ft. Worth. She had migraine headaches frequently from the age
of 30 to about 39. She has had a history of closed locked on different
occasions. She has had splint therapy on and off since about the 1970s
and has had several splints. About 2 months ago she fell and this has
aggravated her problems.

MEDICATIONS

1.  Cardizem 240 mg.

2.  Prevacid 30 mg q.d.

3.  Synthroid 0.1 mg q.d.

4.  Advil for headaches.

5.  Emla cream.

6.  Nexium, but she has stopped taking it.

PRIMARY CONCERNS

1.  Headaches.

2.  Head pain.

3.  Jaw pain.

4.  When she touches her face she gets the feeling of needles sticking
    into her skin.

5.  Neck and shoulder problems.

6.  Eyes get dark circles around them.

7.  Difficulty breathing.

8.  Frequent vertigo.

She reports no problems with headaches, gets tinnitus occasionally but
frequent vertigo. She has decreased hearing on the right side. The other
joints that bother her include her neck, right shoulder back and
questionably the hips. The right foot tingles also at times. She does
have acid reflux and she gets leg swelling. She has sleep disorder.

In frontal view, she has good facial balance. In the profile view, she
appears to have fairly good AP facial balance as well. Intraorally, she
is missing the right first molar. She has the second molar in place.
First molar is in place by a bicuspid size pontic bridge. On the left
side, she is likewise missing the first molar and has it replaced with a
bicuspid size pontic. She has 3 in a bridge posterior in both quadrants.
She has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch. Adequate attached
gingiva. In the upper arch, she appears to have all of her teeth back
through the second molars but has a crown and there may be some
bridgework up there as well. In centric relation she is Class I cuspid
on the right side, Class II end-on on the left side.

MARLENE WALKER 10/25/2005 Page 2

She has an anterior deep bite of about 5 mm. She has about a 2 to 3 mm
overjet. Intraorally, the oral mucosa looks healthy. Uvula is a little
bit elongated but not too significant. The soft palate looks relatively
normal as does the transverse width of the faucial pillars.
Intranasally, she has fairly good sized turbinates particularly on the
left side where it appears to almost touch the nasal septum. The nasal
septum has some deviations in it. The turbinates appears quite large and
the left one particularly being large almost touching the septum. On the
right side the turbinate is large but not quite as significant. The
septum is deviated a little bit off to the left side it appears.
Probable moderate nasal airway obstruction. Columella is normal as well
as luminal valves. Her husband says at times have severe snoring. She
has problems with significant daytime somnolence. She is aware of some
sleep apnea problems where she wakes herself up trying to catch her
breath. To palpation she has high-moderate low-severe pain over the
right TMJ, moderate pain over the right pterygoid, bilateral styloid
areas and right SCM, posterior neck and shoulder. She has milder
tenderness over the right temporalis, right medial pterygoid and left
TMJ. Maximal opening is 40 mm, excursive movement to the right 3 mm and
the left 5 mm. She has an opening pop at about 10 mm on the right side
and closing pop about 5 mm. Difficult to tell if there is a coincidental
pop on the left side as well.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Panorex shows the absence of the first molars replaced by bridges in the
mandibular arches and in the maxillary left arch. On the right side, she
is possibly missing a first molar as well with the second and third
molars adjusted forward. Sinuses look reasonably clear. Some flattening
on the anterior head of the condyle on the right side. The left side
appear a little bit more aggressive which may be arthritis but difficult
to judge from this x-ray.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly
superiorly positioned in the fossa. Articular eminence is moderately
steep. The condyle does look somewhat arthritic.

Left TMJ shows the condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa.
Decreased superior joint space. On opening, there is moderately good
translation of condyles.

Waters view shows the bony septum has some deviation and the sinuses
appear relatively clear. Turbinates appears moderately enlarged
specifically on the right side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows decreased oropharyngeal airway
with an AP dimension of only about 4 mm. She has a skeletal and occlusal
Class II relationship. The soft palate looks relatively long.

BASIC DIAGNOSES

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with
    reductions. (Discs have been displaced but with reduction for
    approximately 30 years.)

2.  AP maxillary deficiency.

3.  AP mandibular deficiency.

MARLENE WALKER 10/25/2005 Page 3

4.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway of only with an APA-P
    dimension of 2 to 3 mm (normal AP dimension 11 mm.)

5.  Class I occlusion on the right side, Class II end-on occlusion on
    the left side.

6.  Anterior deep bite.

7.  TMJ pain.

8.  Headaches.

9.  Myofascial pain.

10. Severe snoring.

11. Sleep apnea syndrome.

12. Nocturnal clenching.

13. Missing first molars in 3 quadrants with 3 in bridges replacing
    bilateral mandibular first molars and maxillary left first molar.

14. Hyperplastic soft palate.

SURGICAL TREATMENT OPTION 1:

1.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advance with TMJ
    Concepts total joint prostheses.

2.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.

3.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.

4.  Bilateral coronoidectomies.

5.  UPPP.

TREATMENT OPTION 2:

1.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
    Mitek anchors.

2.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible.

3.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla.

4.  UPPP.

TREATMENT OPTION 3

1.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
    prosthesis.

2.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.

3.  UPPP.

TREATMENT OPTION 4

1.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with
    Mitek anchors.

2.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain occlusion.

3.  UPPP.

It is quite conceivable that her current splint which she says she ends
up biting through could be initiating nocturnal clenching. She says she
wakes up with headaches predominately in the morning. I feel that she
could be treated with some Klonopin to see if this would stop her
nocturnal clenching and help reduce her headaches. The concern I have is
with her sleep apnea symptoms that we do not want to sedate her too
much. I did give her a prescription for Klonopin 0.5 mg dispensing 10
tablets 1 to 2 tablets q.h.s. She is to take it 1 hour before bedtime
and try 1 tablet at first. If she does good on this but still wakes up
with some headaches, she could try 2 tablets at a time.

MARLENE WALKER 10/25/2005 Page 4

On further discussion with her and her husband Thomas, she seems
reluctant to proceed on with any type of surgery. She would rather try
the medication and perhaps even consider just doing the UPPP procedure
that perhaps it may just give her some improvement with her airway. She
is on Medicare which would make it more difficult particularly in
reference to total joint prosthesis approach. She is to call me next
week to let me know how she is doing with the medication. For pain
medication, we could consider trying Ultram, however, she says she has
to have a coated pill or it upsets her stomach. We will see how things
go with the Klonopin first.
