BARRY WARD 01-28-05

Patient Concerns

1.  Severe sleep apnea

2.  Severe daytime somnolence

3.  Severe snoring

4.  Apneic episodes that occur 39 times an hour

5.  Teeth don’t fit

6.  Difficulties eating and chewing

7.  TMJs click and pop

8.  Difficulty breathing through the nose

9.  If he lies on the left side, the airway becomes totally blocked

10. Predominantly a mouth breather

11. Restless leg and arm problems

12. Severe headaches

13. Severe TMJ pain

14. Vertigo

Patient History

Barry has been aware of having clicking and popping in his jaw joints
since high school of unknown etiology. More currently he started his
workup for his sleep apnea and treatment on 09/08/02. He has had
orthodontic appliances on for about two years and had lower first
bicuspids extracted and the lower anterior teeth retracted.
Approximately four years ago he had his four wisdom teeth removed. He
does get chiropractic treatment about once a month for the past five
years mainly for his neck problems. He takes Zoloft 100 mg at bedtime.
Other joints that bother him include his neck and knees. He is not aware
of clenching or bruxism. He rates his headaches that he gets about three
times a week at a level of 8 in the temporal area, TMJ pain at 8,
average daily pain level of 4, jaw function at 2, diet at 4, and
disability at 5.

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Barry has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.
Upper lip length is about 25 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is
about -3 to -4 mm. Maxillary dental midline is shifted about a
millimeter off to the left. Mandibular dental midline is shifted
probably about 2 mm off to the right. Mandibular dental midline is about
a millimeter off to the right of the chin midline.

In profile view, Barry has probably a good about 4 to 5 mm AP deficiency
in the maxilla. Upper lip supralabrale is probably about 3 to 4 mm
posterior to subnasale. Chin is probably at least 25 mm AP deficient.
Chin-neckline is extremely short, and chin-neck angle is not
well-defined.

Intraorally, he is missing the lower first bicuspids. Has a severe
accentuated curve of occlusion. Anterior teeth have been dumped severely
lingually. Spacing in the first bicuspid area is fairly well closed
except about a millimeter open on the left side. Cuspids are fairly
symmetric anteroposteriorly. There is a cant in the cuspids with the
right cuspid being probably a millimeter or two lower than the left
cuspid. In the upper arch, Barry has all of his teeth back through the
second molars present. He has a super Class II cuspid relationship. Has
a buccal crossbite from the first bicuspid forward bilaterally. As he
postures his mandible forward as far as he can, he hits on his posterior
teeth first and has a little bit of an open bite. A little tendency
toward crossbite yet in the molar area. Uvula is somewhat hyperplastic
but not too bad. Soft palate may be a little bit elongated. Faucial
pillars are a little bit constricted.

Turbinates are moderately enlarged. He has a severely deviated nasal
septum off toward the right side. He has a large spur, however, going
off to the left side. The nasal septum is visible anteriorly being off
to the right side. Has relatively severe nasal airway obstruction.
Columella is increased in width, but this is secondary to the deviated
septum off to the right side. He has some fairly severe constricture of
the luminal valve on the right side. I could hold the nose open and hold
that valve open, and he could breathe significantly better on that side.
He does have a severe snoring problem, severe daytime somnolence, and
severe sleep apnea syndrome.

Maximal incisal opening is 53 mm. Excursive movements to the right are
12 mm and to the left 12 mm. To palpation, he has some mild tenderness
over the temporalis, medial pterygoids, and mild to moderate over the
TMJs, styloid areas, SCMs, and mild tenderness again over the posterior
neck and shoulder areas.

Barry from a centric relation function has audible pops in both TMJs
about somewhere around 25 mm of opening and probably about 15 mm of
closing. Has some crepitus as well. Some of the noises were quite
audible.

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the absence of the lower first bicuspids. All four third
molars are absent. Upper second molars have no brackets on them. He has
rather severe arthritis of both TMJs with significant anterior beaking
on the right condyle and loss and significant sloping on the anterior
aspect of the left condyle. Septum deviates significantly off toward the
right side. Turbinates appear significantly enlarged. Sinuses appear
relatively clear with the left one being just a little bit more cloudy
than the right side. Styloid processes are quite prominent and calcified
down toward and overlap the posterior aspect of the mandible.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that there is rather advanced arthritis in the
left TMJ. There is virtually no posterior or superior joint space
remaining. Articular eminence has sort of a soft slope to it, although
it is quite long.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that also has some arthritic changes
and some anterior beaking present. Significantly decreased vertical
joint space and sort of a moderate-sized posterior joint space.
Articular eminence also has sort of a soft gentle slope to it.

On opening, there is good translation of both TMJs.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. The turbinates are
moderately enlarged. Bony septum has some deviation to it but not nearly
as severe as the cartilaginous portion which cannot be seen on the
radiographs. Shift of the mandibular dental midlines is noted and fairly
significant.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Barry has a high occlusal
plane angle facial morphology. Upper arch looks good and good angulation
of the upper incisors, although the maxilla is anteroposteriorly
deficient, and the posterior aspect of the maxilla is vertically
deficient. The mandible is severely AP deficient. Lower incisors have
been pulled back in significantly and are rather severely decreased in
angulation. Roots seem to be coming out through the buccal cortex.
Oropharyngeal airway is totally blocked off, but part of this is due to
tongue posture and Barry trying to get his lower jaw back in centric
relation. He does have a large chin implant probably Silastic measuring
12 mm in AP dimension. Barry has a tooth-size discrepancy with a
Bolton's difference of about 2 mm. Hand articulating Barry’s models into
a Class I cuspid position shows that there is transverse deficiency of
the maxilla yet remaining. Significant accentuated curve of occlusion
with the lower anterior teeth being probably 3 mm higher on the left
side and probably 4 mm higher than the posterior teeth on the right
side. The lower anterior six teeth are severely tipped posteriorly. In a
Class I molar position, the transverse width of the maxilla is
relatively normal.

Basic Diagnoses

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocations with
    probable significant deformation and perforations

2.  Severe AP mandibular deficiency

3.  AP maxillary deficiency

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency

5.  Slight transverse maxillary deficiency

6.  Class II molar super Class II cuspid relationship

7.  Severely decreased inclination of the mandibular anterior teeth

8.  Severely accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch

9.  Missing mandibular first bicuspid extracted for orthodontic reasons

10. Missing all four third molars

11. Tooth-size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2 mm

12. Severely deviated nasal septum off toward the right side and a large
    bone spur off toward the left side

13. Hypertrophied turbinates

14. Nasal airway obstruction

15. Decreased oropharyngeal airway

16. Severe headaches

17. Severe TMJ pain

18. Myofascial pain

19. Severe sleep apnea

20. Severe snoring

21. Daytime somnolence

22. Vertigo

Recommended Treatment

1.  MRI of left and right TMJs

2.  Presurgical orthodontics

    A.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch

    B.  Align and level mandibular arch and re-open up first bicuspid
        extraction spaces to equal 6 to 7 mm. This movement also should
        level the curve of Spee. Strip lower anterior teeth removing 2
        mm of tooth structure to correct for the tooth-size discrepancy

3.  CT scan of TMJs and jaws (TMJ Concepts protocol)

4.  Surgery

    A.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses

    B.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and
        downgraft it posteriorly

    C.  Bilateral coronoidectomies

    D.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvested from the abdomen)

    E.  Bilateral partial turbinectomies

    F.  Nasal septoplasty

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion

6.  Dental implants to bilateral mandibular first bicuspid area

7.  Restorative dentistry to place crowns on dental implants
