BRADLEY WINES 07/02/2008

Bradley is 27 years old and referred by Joanna Houston, a patient of
ours. He has been diagnosed as having:

1.  Allergic bronchitis.

2.  Ménière's disease.

He smokes about a half pack of cigarettes per day for about 8 years. He
takes the following medications:

1.  Zyrtec.

2.  Occasional Tylenol for headache.

Bradley is 5 foot 10 and weighs ______. Primary concerns Bradley has
include the following:

1.  Neck pain.

2.  Jaw pain.

3.  Bite seems to be changing and getting worse.

4.  Top teeth are now crooked and were not at a younger age.

Bradley gets headaches predominantly over the masseter muscle and lower
temporal area at about a level of 5. He does not feel he has any pain
directly in the jaw joints, but pain around the head and the neck is at
about a level of 6 on the average day. Jaw function is at 5, diet and
disability at 0. He gets earaches, tinnitus, and vertigo, but relates
this to the Ménière's disease. He feel that he sometimes clenches and/or
bruxes his teeth at night. No other joints bother him.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, upper lip length is about 25 mm.
Upper tooth lip relationship is zero. The maxillary midline is fairly
close to being on the facial midline. In profile, Bradley has a head
postured forward neck position. Upper lip and maxilla appear to have
fairly good projection. Chin appears retruded and chin neckline is
fairly long, but chin neck angle is not well defined. The chin may be
retruded as much as 10 mm. Intraorally, Bradley has all of his lower
teeth, but with spacing between the lower cuspids and first bicuspids.
He has adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch, he has all of his
upper teeth back through the second molars present. He appears to have
an accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch. He has almost an end-on
incisor relationship with a little diastema between the central
incisors. He has an anterior crossbite, but posteriorly he appears to
have adequate maxillary width. He has basically a Class I occlusal
relationship in the cuspids posteriorly, but in the mandible because of
the space in the lower arch he has an end-on actually anterior crossbite
kind of relationship. Transversely, Bradley has a transverse cant in the
occlusal plane with the left side being about 2 mm higher than the right
side. The same is true in the lower arch with the left side being 2 mm
higher than the right side. The turbinates are moderately enlarged. The
septum appears reasonably straight.

Bradley does state he has moderate snoring problems, moderate daytime
somnolence, a relatively severe sleep disorder, and is a mouth breather
particularly at nighttime, but also sometimes during the day.

To palpation, he has some moderate tenderness over the temporalis
muscles and mild to moderate over the TMJs. Joints seem to function
reasonably smoothly. Incisal opening is 55 mm. Excursion movements are
about 10 mm in each direction. The joints seem to function relationship
smoothly.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. He has spacing between the lower cuspids and first bicuspids.
Sinuses look relatively clear. It is difficult to evaluate the joints in
these films.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is significantly deviated. The
turbinates are moderate in size. Sinuses look reasonably clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology. There
appears to be good joint space. The articular eminence is moderately
steep. On opening, there appears to be some restricted translation of
the left joint.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with good shape and good joint space.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he has basically a Class I
skeletal relationship anterior and a crossbite. There is a little
vertical discrepancy at the inferior border of the mandible with the
right side being about 5 mm lower than the left side. Oropharyngeal
airway is slightly constricted with an airway dimension at the soft
palate level of about 7 mm and at the base of the tongue of about 9 mm.

Basic diagnoses for Bradley would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral hypertrophied tonsils.

2.  Nasoseptal deviation and spurring.

3.  Hyperplastic turbinates.

4.  Nasal airway obstruction.

5.  AP maxillary hypoplasia and asymmetry.

6.  Mandibular prognathism.

7.  Anterior crossbite.

8.  Class I cuspid molar relationship.

9.  Transverse cant in the occlusion with the left side being 2 mm
    higher than the right side.

10. External nasal deformity with it being tipped off to the right side
    about 3 mm.

11. AP microgenia.

12. Diastemas between the mandibular cuspids and first bicuspids.

13. Mild high occlusal plane angle.

14. Myofascial pain.

15. Headaches.

Recommended treatment would include the following:

1.  Surgery Stage 1.

    a.  Tonsillectomy.

    b.  Nasal septoplasty.

    c.  Inferior turbinectomies.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch closing the spacing between the
          lower cuspids and first bicuspids.

3.  Consider medications (i.e., Klonopin) to aid in achieving better
    sleep and decrease the myofascial discomfort that he has.

4.  Surgery Stage 2.

    a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance, upright the incisors,
          transverse level, and anteroposteriorly level the occlusal
          planes.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a counterclockwise direction as well as level it
          transversely.

    c.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to augment the mandible
          4 to 5 mm.

    d.  External rhinoplasty to straighten the nose.

    e.  Consider UPPP procedure if indicated for elimination of any
          residual airway problems following surgery stage 1.

5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
