KATIE ZENG 08/04/2008

Katie is 15 years old. Referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich. She is in good
health with no major medical problems. She takes doxycycline 100 mg q.d.
She has no TMJ problems. She does tend to breathe through her mouth at
night and also sometimes during the day. Primary concerns that Katie has
includes the following:

1.  Teeth and jaws do not align up properly.

2.  Bite relationship is getting progressively worse.

Katie has no TMJ issues and no pain issues. She had orthodontics from
2005 to 2006. Since that time, her bite has worsened.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION: In frontal view, Katie has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about 4 mm. In profile view, she has some
deficiency and projection of subnasale by probably about 3 mm. Chin
neckline and chen neck angle are fairly well defined. The chin may be
slightly retruded by about 5 mm. The lower third face is elongated. She
has to force her lips together. Lip incompetency appears to be
approximately 7 mm. Intraorally, Katie has all of her lower teeth back
through the second molars erupted. She has some moderate crowding of the
lower anterior arch. She has decreased attached gingiva particularly
around the incisors. In the upper arch, she is missing 1st bicuspid
teeth bilaterally. Anteriorly, she has a crossbite. She has about 0.5 mm
reverse overbite. She has almost a full Class III being a little bit
greater on the left side. Transversely, the occlusal plane appears to be
lower on the left side by about 2 mm compared to the right side in the
cuspid area. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal except the
fascial pillars are moderately constricted due to large tonsils. The
right tonsil is the largest and moderate in size and the left one is
just mildly enlarged. Intranasally, the turbinates are enlarged
bilaterally. Katie does state that she is predominantly a mouth breather
at night and also breathes a lot through her mouth during the day.
However, she is not aware of snoring, daytime somnolence, sleep apnea,
and she has no reported sleep disorder. She has no tenderness to
palpation around the head and neck area. The TMJs appear to function
relatively smoothly. Incisal opening is about 54 mm. Excursion movements
are 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of four impacted
third molars. The maxillary first bicuspids are absent. She has a 3 x 3
retainer in the upper arch. Condylar heads and necks appear somewhat
elongated. It is difficult to evaluate the sinuses.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are relatively clear. Turbinates
appears moderately enlarged. The bony septum appears reasonably
straight.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that appears somewhat
elongated. Joint space appears somewhat thin. Articular eminence is
moderate in inclination.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly normal configuration, but
somewhat elongated in the condylar head and neck area. Joint space
appears thin. Articular eminence has a moderate inclination. On opening,
there is good translation of both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Katie has a high Class III
occlusal relationship, but probably Class I skeletal relationship
because of a relatively high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway
at the soft palate area measures about 6 to 7 mm and at the base of the
tongue measures about 9 to 10 mm in the midpart of the tongue and closer
to the hyaloid measures about 7 mm.

Basic diagnoses for Katie would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

2.  Mandibular prognathism.

3.  Anterior maxillary vertical excess.

4.  Anterior mandibular vertical excess.

5.  AP microgenia.

6.  Class III occlusion.

7.  Anterior and left posterior crossbite.

8.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

9.  High occlusal plane angle.

10. Impacted third molars x4.

11. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

12. Tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton's difference of 2.5 mm.

13. Decreased attached gingiva in the lower anterior arch.

14. Missing maxillary 1^(st) bicuspid teeth bilaterally.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Keep lateral incisor roots
          tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped distally to make room
          for interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the lower anterior
          teeth removing about 2.5 mm of tooth structures to correct for
          the tooth size discrepancy.

2.  Evaluation with periodontist with consideration of gingival grafting
    to lower anterior arch if it is determined that the amount of
    attached gingiva is insufficient orthodontically.

3.  Evaluate growth to determine of condylar hyperplasia is in fact an
    active growth process.

4.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral mandibular high condylectomies with articular disc
          repositioning if condylar hyperplasia is confirmed.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla superiorly
          anteriorly and downward posteriorly.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible in
          a counterclockwise direction into best occlusal fit.

    d.  Vertical reduction AP augmentation genioplasty.

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    f.  Surgical removal of four impacted third molars.

    g.  Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to advance and
          superiorly reposition the bony chin.

4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
