CAROL MCKAIG 07/10/2009

The patient is referred by Dr. Rex Eatmon. Carol is 53 years old. She
has a long TMJ history. She was involved in a motor vehicle accident in
about 1982, I believe. She sustained TMJ injuries. In 1984, she had
bilateral TMJ Proplast Teflon interpositional implants placed. In 1985,
those were removed and Vitek fossas with probably stainless steel
mandibular condyles, although she called them titanium condyles, were
placed. Dr. Ray Reed is the doctor that placed those. I believe he used
stainless steel condyles at that time. In 1991, she had bilateral TMJ
debridements performed. In August 2001, the bilateral joint prostheses
were removed and bilateral custom-made Christensen total joint
prostheses were placed. She has been sick since 2001 with autoimmune
problems and hypersensitivities to the materials in the prostheses. A
few weeks ago Dr. Rex Eatmon taped a piece of chromium cobalt alloy on
her right arm and it left a huge reaction indicating that she is likely
hypersensitive to the materials in the prostheses, plus the fact that
she probably has metalosis bilaterally along with foreign body giant
cell reaction bilaterally from the previous Proplast Teflon implants and
has created probable hypersensitivity reaction she is having. She has
multiple skin lesions around the head, extremities, torso that she feels
are related to the sensitivities to the metals. She has difficulties
walking and ambulating and uses a cane for assistance. At one time, she
was told she had lupus, but then someone did some additional tests and
told her that she has neither lupus nor vasculitis. She has problems
with low blood pressure and her temperature is low, sometimes dropping
down to 94.

She gets headaches she rates at about a level of 10 in the frontal,
temporal area. She rates her TMJ pain at times as high as 10 and average
daily pain at 8. She rates her jaw function at 6, diet at 6, disability
at 10. Incisal opening is 39 mm. Excursion movement to the right 1 mm,
to the left 2 mm. She has a reasonably good Class I cuspid-molar
relationship, although she is missing all of the mandibular molars and
missing the maxillary third molars. To palpation, she has severe pain
over the right masseter, right retromolar area, and medial pterygoid
area. She has moderate pain over the TMJs, right temporalis, left
masseter, left retromandibular area, and shoulders. She gets earaches,
tinnitus, vertigo. Essentially all of her joints hurt her. She is not
aware of clenching or bruxism.

Based on her history and clinical and radiographic evaluation, her
diagnoses from the maxillofacial area includes the following:

1.  Failure of bilateral Christensen total joint prostheses with
    heterotopic bone formation around the prostheses.

2.  Probable metal hypersensitivities to materials in her current
    prostheses.

3.  Bilateral TMJ metalosis and foreign body giant cell reaction.

4.  Myositis.

5.  Severe adverse effect on immune system.

6.  Extensive skin lesions throughout the body.

7.  AP maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia.

8.  Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway.

9.  Sleep apnea symptoms.

10. Myofascial pain.

11. Missing all 6 mandibular molars and maxillary second and third
    molars as well as a right central incisor.

12. Headaches.

13. TMJ pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Laboratory blood testing for hypersensitivities to the materials in
    her current prostheses through Rush Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL.

2.  Evaluation at the Environmental Center at Dallas by Dr. William Ray
    to determine further assays for hypersensitivity and specifically to
    test for titanium.

3.  Placement of titanium implant in forearm to test for reactivity.

4.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints to aid in the construction of the
    custom-fitted total joint prostheses.

5.  Surgery.

    a.  Removal of bilateral failed Christensen total joint prostheses.

    b.  Debridement of the temporomandibular joints to remove the
          heterotopic bone formation.

    c.  Mandibular reconstruction as well as advancement with TMJ
          Concepts total joint prostheses using pure titanium
          components.

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it forward in a
          counterclockwise direction.

    e.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.

6.  Postsurgical rehabilitation as necessary to achieve a good
    functional jaw relationship.
