SIDKI TANSEL TUNC 01/06/2009

Tansel is 26 years old. He has no TMJ problems, headaches, earaches,
tinnitus, nor vertigo. He is not aware of clenching or bruxing his
teeth. Primary concerns that Tansel has involve facial asymmetry. Tansel
apparently had fairly good facial symmetry and then began developing
facial asymmetry around the age of 15 to 16, but he has not noticed any
increased asymmetry since about the age of 20.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Tansel has fairly good symmetry
in the middle and upper third face. The lower third face demonstrates
more asymmetry. He has more fullness in the right side of the mandible
including even the cheek areas compared to the left side. He does have a
slight orbital imbalance with the right side being probably 1 to 2 mm
higher than the left side. Upper lip length is 24 mm. Upper lip tooth
relationship is -2 mm. The maxillary midline is shifted off towards the
left side about 2 mm as is the mandibular dental midline. The chin is
deviated off towards the left side probably about 8 mm. He has a
significant cant in the transverse occlusal plane with the left side
being about 3 mm higher than the right side. In profile view, Tansel
appears to have significant AP maxillary deficiency with the maxilla
being at least 6 mm AP deficient. Chin appears to be about 15 mm AP
deficient. Chin neckline is short and chin neck angle is not well
defined. Intraorally, Tansel is missing the mandibular right second
bicuspid and has a crown on the first molar. On the left side, he has
all of his teeth back through the second molars erupted. He has some
mild crowding in the lower anterior arch, but has good attached gingiva.
In the upper arch, he is missing the left first bicuspid and that space
is fairly well closed up with only about a 2 mm space left. He has some
lower arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being at least 2 mm posterior
to the right cuspid. The lower arch may be just slightly asymmetric with
the left cuspid being 1 mm posterior to the right cuspid. There is just
a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by probably 1
to 2 mm, but a Class I on the left side. He appears to have almost an
end-on incisor relationship. He has a Class II molar relationship on the
left side. His incisor relationship is end on. Oropharyngeal tissues
look healthy and normal. The nasal septum is deviated significantly off
towards to the right side with some spurring at the base of the septum.
Turbinates are moderate in size. However, Tansel reports no difficulties
breathing through his nose. To palpation, Tansel has no tenderness
around the head and neck area. Joints seem to function relatively
smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 55 mm. Excursion movements are 10
mm to the right and 9 mm to the left.

Radiographic evaluation shows a large cavity present in the maxillary
right second molar. He has a large restoration in the mandibular left
first molar that may have some recurrence around it. On the mandibular
right side, he has a root canal on the first molar. The mandibular third
molars are horizontally impacted.

Basic diagnoses for Tansel would be as follows:

1.  Arrested right mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

2.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

3.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

4.  Facial asymmetry with the right side being 5 to 6 mm more prominent
    laterally than the left side.

5.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the left side being 3 mm
    higher than the right side.

6.  Class I cuspid on the left side, slight Class III on the right side.

7.  Maxillary arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 2 to 3 mm
    posterior to the right cuspid.

8.  Mandibular arch asymmetry with the left cuspid being about 1 mm
    posterior to the right cuspid.

9.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

10. Impacted third molars x4.

11. Missing maxillary left first bicuspid, mandibular right second
    bicuspid.

12. Dental caries in several teeth including the mandibular left second
    molar, first molar, maxillary right second molar and others.

13. Maxillary and mandibular dental midlines shifted 2 mm to the left
    and chin shifted approximately 8 mm to the left.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Restorative dentistry to eliminate dental caries and salvage as many
    teeth as possible.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Retract the maxillary left
          cuspid posteriorly against the second bicuspid. Open up space
          between the cuspid and lateral incisor of approximately 2 mm
          (this space will then be removed at the time of surgery).

3.  Align and level mandibular arch. Maintain the spacing on the right
    side for the second bicuspid. Slenderize the lower anterior teeth
    removing 2 mm of tooth structure to help with the alignment and to
    keep from flaring the lower incisors any further forward.

4.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          forward, correct the posterior yaw, and transversely level the
          occlusal plane.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward
          with the left side advancing more than the right side, correct
          the posterior yaw, and transversely level the occlusion.

    c.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x4.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

6.  Restorative dentistry including placement of an osteointegrated
    implant and crown in the mandibular right second bicuspid area as
    well as any other restorative dentistry that may be required.
