TRAVIS TURLEY 01/23/2009

Travis is 32 years old, referred by Dr. Duane Keller. Travis’ problems
began in 1997 when he got hit on the jaw and his jaw was fractured. He
was placed in intermaxillary fixation for 6 weeks. Initially, he thought
things worked okay, but then developed problems again. On 04/15/1999, he
had a right TMJ arthroplasty and disc plication performed by Dr. Ken
Rotskoff to release right TMJ fibrosis and repair a displaced disc. He
was then placed into splint therapy. He then was eating and the left
side the disc became displaced causing significant pain. In 2001, he had
a left TMJ disc plication procedure performed by Dr. Noble. Through the
years, he has had physical therapy and at least three splints.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Travis has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 24 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is zero. The maxillary midline is pretty much on
the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is just slightly to
the left about 1 mm. The chin is probably about 2 to 3 mm to the left.
In profile view, Travis has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of
probably no more than about 2 to 3 mm. The chin is retruded about 15-20
mm. Chin neckline is extremely short. Intraorally, Travis has all of his
lower teeth back to the second molars. In the upper arch, he also has
all of his teeth back through the second molars. Travis is basically a
Class I cuspid-molar relationship. He has about a 3-mm deep bite
relationship. Travis has a transverse cant in the occlusal plane with
the left side being 1.5 to 2 mm higher than the right side. The
oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy. Turbinates are moderately
enlarged. Travis does not have any history of snoring. He has some mild
to moderate daytime tiredness due to the fact that he does not sleep
well at night. Travis is not sure if he breathes through his mouth at
night or not, but he thinks he breathes through his nose. To palpation,
Travis has moderate pain over the TMJs and some mild tenderness over the
retromandibular area and left shoulder. Maximal incisal opening is 33 mm
and about 25 mm without significant pain. Excursion movements are 5 mm
in each direction. With opening excursion movements, Travis has crepitus
in his joints.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Axial view shows the sinuses are clear, but he
has a huge turbinate, particularly on the right side.

Coronal view shows that he has moderately large turbinates with
significant obstruction on the right side. He has a huge septal spur off
to the right side that is actually touching the lateral nasal wall.
Sinuses appear clear.

Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but the rest of the
teeth are all present. Sinuses appear clear. The turbinate on the right
side appears enlarged. Both joints appear arthritic with the right side
being significantly worse than the left side.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There are
some areas that there may be some small osteophytic development. Joint
space appears decreased vertically. Lateral rim of the fossa curves
inferiorly about 3 to 4 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with a severe deformity and
extension superiorly on the superolateral aspect of the condyle that
extends above what appears to be the base of the condyle by about 3 to 4
mm. Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly about 4 mm. There is
virtually no joint space between the upward growth of the condylar
element and the fossa.

Left TMJ sagittal view show a condyle that appears arthritic. There is
anterior beaking present. There is decrease joint space superiorly and
particularly anteriorly between the condyle and the articular eminence.
There appears to be some mild degenerative changes in the articular
eminence as well. There appears to be a little osteophytic development
of bone up off the condyle towards the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view show a growth off the top of the condyle with
very minimal joint space remaining. There is some anterior beaking
present. However, medially there is increased vertical joint space.
Articular eminence has a moderate inclination.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that he is basically slight Class
II skeletal relationship, but Class I occlusion. Oropharyngeal airway
actually looks good. Maxilla and mandible are moderately retruded.

Basic diagnoses for Travis would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.

2.  Bilateral TMJ severe pain.

3.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

6.  High occlusal plane angle.

7.  Class I occlusion.

Travis is not interested in his jaw position and is focused only on his
joint pathology and pain. Therefore, the recommended treatment would be
as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ total joint prostheses.

2.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.
