LOUISE SYMINGTON 10/29/2008

Lou is 57 years old, referred by Darlene Robertson of Diamond Springs
Drive, Houston, TX 77077.

HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS: Lou’s TMJ problems began of unknown etiology
at about the age of 31 in 1983. She subsequently saw Dr. Ray Reid. She
has then had the following surgeries:

1.  In 1983, bilateral TMJ arthroplasty with disc repositioning. She
    subsequently has had multiple steroid injections in and around the
    joints for many years following including up to the last few months.
    She has had extensive physical therapy through this time also.

2.  In 1987, bilateral TMJ Vitek-Kent total joint prostheses were
    placed.

3.  In 1989, the mandibular component of the Vitek-Kent total joint
    prostheses were removed bilaterally and replaced with Synthes
    mandibular components.

4.  In 1994, she had bilateral TMJ debridement with apparently some
    removal of heterotopic bone.

5.  In 1996, the previously placed total joint prostheses were removed,
    the joint debrided, and the bone of mandibular joints were
    reconstructed with Christiansen total joint prostheses with acrylic
    heads.

Lou rates her TMJ pain at about a level of 9, average daily pain at 9,
jaw function at 10, diet at 6, and disability at 8. She gets headaches
in the frontal, temporal, posterior head and on top of the head
bilaterally at about a level of 8. She has no problems with earaches,
but does get occasional tinnitus and occasional vertigo. No other joints
bother her. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and also during the
day.

Lou takes the following medications:

1.  Divigel (estrogen replacement).

2.  Prometrium (progesterone replacement).

3.  Vicodin 5-mg tablets 1 tablet q.4 to 6 hours with an average of 4
    per day.

4.  Aleve.

5.  Calcium.

6.  Aspirin 81 mg daily.

7.  Lexapro 20 mg q.d.

Primary concerns that Lou has at this time include the following:

1.  Pain.

2.  Limited opening.

3.  Disruption of normal life activities.

In addition, Lou does have snoring problems and she does have some
daytime tiredness as well. She has difficulty sleeping primarily related
to positional changes that cause pain for her. She generally tries to
sleep on her stomach with her head propped on her hands to keep the
sides of the jaws from receiving any pressure.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, she has fairly good left-to-right
facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline maybe about 1 mm to
the left and the mandibular dental midline is about 2 mm to the left.
Chin is about 2 mm to the left as well. Left commissure is down about 3
to 4 mm compared to the right side. In profile view, the maxilla appears
retruded by about 4 to 6 mm. Chin appears retruded by about 15 mm. Chin
neckline is extremely short and chin neck angle, although moderately
defined is quite short. Intraorally, Lou has all of her lower teeth back
through the second molars. Likewise in the upper arch, she has all of
her teeth back through the second molars. She has basically a Class I
cuspid-molar relationship just with a slight Class II tendency on the
left side. She has some moderate crowding of the lower anterior arch.
Maximal incisal opening for Lou is about 3 mm and excursion movement is
about 0.5 mm in each direction. She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite
relationship. To palpation, she has relatively severe pain to palpation
over the masseter muscles, medial pterygoids, TMJs, and the
retromandibular areas. She has high moderate pain over the posterior
neck and shoulder areas and moderate pain over the temporalis and SCMs.
Intranasally, turbinates look relatively normal in size as best as they
could be observed. The septum is deviated just slightly off to the right
side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of bilateral
Christiansen prostheses with acrylic heads. Sinuses look relatively
clear, although there could be a little something in the right sinus.
She has root canals on the maxillary right second bicuspids, second
molar, and left second bicuspid. All four third molars are absent.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Bony nasal
septum is reasonably straight. Turbinates appear moderate in size. She
has bilateral Christiansen prostheses present and it appears that there
is metal-on-metal contact. There appear to be about 3 to 4 screws
stabilizing each of the fossa components and probably 6 screws in each
side supporting the mandibular portion of the prosthesis.

Left TMJ tomogram shows that it appears she has had a previous
coronoidectomy. There appears to be some heterotopic bone around the
prosthesis particularly anterior. It appears that there is
metal-on-metal articulation of the mandibular component with fossa
component.

Right TMJ tomogram shows there may be some heterotopic bone surrounding
the joint. The Christiansen prosthesis is present and there may be
metal-on-metal contact. On opening, there is virtually no movement at
all in the joint.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Lou has a retruded maxilla
and mandible. The oropharyngeal airway is difficult to assess, but
likely has some fairly severe constricture. There is a moderate high
occlusal plane angle. Bilateral joint prostheses and metal fossas are
evident.

Basic diagnoses for Louise would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ failed Christiansen total joint prosthesis.

2.  Heterotopic bone formation and foreign body giant cell reaction
    around the failed Christiansen total joint prosthesis.

3.  Bilateral TMJ and mandibular bony ankylosis.

4.  AP maxillary hypoplasia and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

6.  Bilateral TMJ bony anklyosis.

7.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

8.  Sleep apnea symptoms.

9.  Severe TMJ pain.

10. Headaches.

11. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.

2.  Consider sleep apnea study.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral removal of failed Christiansen total joint prosthesis.

    b.  Thorough debridement with removal of heterotopic bone and
          foreign body giant cell reaction.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
          Concepts total joint prostheses.

    d.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    e.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance it and down graft the posterior
          aspect.
