ISAAC THOMPSON, JR. 07/24/2009

Isaac is 66 years old. Isaac is a self-referral. Isaac’s problems began
when he was about 38 years old of unknown etiology when he started with
some changes in his bite as his teeth were being ground down. It was
when he was in a very stressful government job. His jaw joint problems,
however, just occurred within the past year of unknown etiology. He was
chewing on something and he heard a loud pop on one side and that sort
of began the TMJ problems and for the past six months he has had the
increased pain factors present. Primary concern that he has is in
reference to grinding and snapping that he has in the jaw joints and he
is concerned as to the damage that may require surgery.

Isaac is on a list of medications that are listed on a separate sheet in
his chart.

Isaac headaches at about a level of 5 in the right temporal area. He
rate his TMJ pain at 5 on the right side. Average daily pain is about a
5. He rates jaw function at 5, diet at 7, disability at 1. He gets
right-sided earaches, but no tinnitus and no vertigo. Other joints that
bother him include his fingers, hands, right big toe, left wrist. He has
a strong history previously of bruxism. Currently, he does not feel that
he does any significant clenching or bruxing.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Isaac has good left-to-right
facial balance. Upper lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is about -4. The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline
are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline. The nasal tip may
just be slightly off to the left side about 2 mm. In profile, he
probably has some AP maxillary deficiency at the incisal edge level
about of about 4-5 mm. The chin appears to be retruded about 10-12 mm.
Chin neckline is short and not well defined. Intraorally, Isaac has all
of his lower teeth back through the second molars present. He has an
accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch and some moderate crowding
of the lower anterior teeth. He has some significant wear on his teeth.
His attached gingiva appears reasonably healthy, although there is some
inflammation around the mandibular right central incisor. In the upper
arch, he has all of his teeth back through the second molars. He is
basically Class I cuspid on the right side and Class II cuspid on the
left side. He has an anterior deep bite of about 3 mm. He has some
audible noises in the right TMJ. To palpation, he has no tenderness
around the head and neck area. Joints function smoothly on the left
side, but on the right side he has crepitation. He does have occasional
loud crackling, popping kind of noises in the right TMJ only. Maximum
incisal opening is 43 mm, opening without discomfort about 36 mm.
Excursion movement to the right about 9 mm and to the left 6 mm. On
excursion movements, he had audible clicking noises in the left TMJ, but
not so much on the right side. He did have a little crepitus on the
right side, but more noticeable and audible was the clicking on the left
joint. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy, but the soft
palate appears somewhat elongated and fascial pillars appear moderately
constricted. He has previously had his tonsils removed. Intranasally,
the turbinates appear moderately enlarged. His septum appears reasonably
straight. Isaac does not claim to have any nasal airway obstruction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. There are crowns on most of the posterior teeth particularly the
molars. Sinuses look reasonably clear. It is difficult to evaluate the
TMJs. Septum appears reasonably straight.

Coronal view shows that he has significantly hypertrophied turbinates.
Septum is reasonably clear. Sinuses appear clear.

Axial view shows that he has hypertrophied inferior turbinates with a
very constricted airway. Sinuses look clear.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that he has got good vertical joint
space, but decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint.
There may be a little extension of the lateral pole of the condyle out
laterally. This may be indicative of a medially displaced articular
disc.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with a significantly decreased
lateral joint space with probably bone-on-bone contact. Vertical joint
space appears a little bit better balanced.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that has some degenerative
changes associated with it. There is some anterior beaking present.
Vertical space appears almost increased. The condyle appears to be
postured forward slightly in the fossa.

Right TMJ sagittal tomogram shows some advanced arthritis in the joint.
There is some anterior beaking and decreased anterior joint space. The
condyle appears to be postured forward in the fossa. Towards the medial
side of the joint, it appears that there is getting close to being
bone-on-bone contact.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Isaac has some AP maxillary
and mandibular deficiency. However, the oropharyngeal airway at the soft
palate measures 7 mm and at the base of the tongue measures almost 8 mm.
He does have a slight increased occlusal plane angle. The maxilla and
mandible appear retruded.

Basic diagnoses for Isaac would be as follows:

1.  Right TMJ severe arthritis.

2.  Right TMJ pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Right TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
          prostheses.

    b.  Fat graft to right TMJ (harvest from the abdomen).

    c.  Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.
