LAUREN TRUSSELL 09/08/2009

Referred by Jacqueline Whitmore and also Dr. Dale Greer, 5925 Forest
Lane, Suite 311, Dallas, TX 75230. Lauren is 27 years old and in good
health. She is gluten intolerant. The onset of her jaw problems began
she was about 20 and may be due to bruxism. She is not aware of having
any trauma to her jaws. She gets headaches at about a level of 6
throughout most of the head. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily
pain at 6, jaw function at 3, diet at 0, disability at 2. The
medications she takes includes Yasmin and Flonase. She also does take
multivitamins, calcium, magnesium, zinc, and flax oil supplements.
Treatments she has had so far include bite appliances. She has had
several bite appliances including the NTI, soft rubber splint, and she
is basically disposed to those type of appliances. She has also had yoga
to try to decrease her stress. She does get occasional earaches,
occasional tinnitus, and moderate vertigo. She is aware of clenching and
bruxing at nighttime and also during the day. Lauren was slow to mature
and did not go through puberty until she was about 15 or 16. It is about
this time she believes that her bite opened some. The opening was
somewhat progressive, but it has been stable like it is for the last
several years. She had her wisdom teeth removed in the eighth grade. She
did have orthodontic treatment including head gear beginning sometime
around the age of perhaps 9 and finished at about age 11. Dr. Radcliff
placed her in a tongue guard which was very uncomfortable for her and
this was placed probably around the age of 13 to 14.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is 2 mm. The maxillary midline is off to the right side
about 1 mm as is the mandibular dental midline. The chin is off to the
right side about 2-3 mm. She appears to be slightly more full on the
left side of her face by maybe 2-3 mm. In profile, she has good facial
balance. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the
second molars present. Teeth are fairly well aligned and level. In the
upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. She
has an anterior open bite of about 3 mm. She is fairly close to being
Class I cuspid-molar relationship. She has a slight accentuated curve of
Spee in the upper arch and a slight reverse curve of Spee in the
mandibular arch. Oropharyngeal tissues look normal and healthy. Nasal
airway looks reasonably good. On functioning, the jaws are fairly
smooth. To palpation, she has low severe pain over the TMJs, high
moderate pain over the masseters, moderate pain over the shoulders,
posterior neck, styloid areas, and temporalis area and mild tenderness
over the SCMs. TMJs seem to function relatively smoothly. Maximal
incisal opening is about 47 mm, but only about 15 mm without discomfort.
Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION: Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. She has an anterior bite. It is difficult to evaluate the
condyles because of overlying structures.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates are moderately
enlarged, particularly on the right side where it appears to obliterate
a good part of the airway. The septum appears reasonably straight.

Coronal view shows the sinuses are clear. Right turbinate is
significantly enlarged compared to the left one.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that at the lateral aspect of the
joint is quite flattened. There is a little bit of anterior beaking
present. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Joint space appears
somewhat narrow at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is flattened along the
anterior head. Articular eminence is moderately steep. Condyle appears
to be reasonably positioned within the fossa.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral
width. There is significantly decreased joint space at the last aspect
of the joint and there appears to be almost bone-on-bone contact.
Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 3 mm.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with a decreased joint space at the
lateral aspect of the joint. There is almost bone-on-bone contact in
some of the areas. Lateral rim curves inferiorly about 3-4 mm. These
radiographs would tend to indicate a medially displaced articular disc.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the patient has fairly good
facial balance. Oropharyngeal airway looks good.

Dental model analysis reveals that there is a reversed curve of Spee in
the lower arch and in the upper arch there is an accentuated curve of
Spee. Lower incisors are depressed almost 3 mm from normal position.
There is a tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 0.5 mm.
Transversely, the occlusal plane is fairly level. Right TMJ joint
appears a little bit normal in architecture and disc position. The
condyle may also be postured forward slightly, but there is no evidence
of disc displacement on that side.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular discs displaced at the lateral
    aspect of the joints with a rotational displacement of the discs.

2.  Anterior open bite of 3 mm.

3.  Class I cuspid-molar relationship.

4.  Reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.

5.  Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.

6.  TMJ pain.

7.  Headaches.

8.  Myofascial pain.

9.  Chronic clenching and bruxism.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Medication: Klonopin 1-mg tablet, 1 tablet q.h.s. to control
    clenching and bruxism.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies if necessary.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make to room for
          interdental osteotomies in case they are necessary. Slenderize
          the lower anterior teeth to retract them slightly.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to maintain a Class I
          cuspid-molar relationship.

    c.  Anterior mandibular subapical osteotomy to elevate the lower
          incisors approximately 3 mm.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Restorative dentistry.
