CLAUDIA TANNER 07/24/2009

Claudia is 57 years old. Referred by Dr. Jim Tyree, 901 S. Mopac,
Building 2, Suite 395, Austin, TX 78746, telephone number 512-328-4411.

Claudia has had headache problems since her teens years, but does not
recall exactly when her joint issues began, but there could be a
correlation. Etiology is unknown. Primary concerns she has at this time
are:

1.  TMJ pain.

2.  Earaches.

3.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

4.  Loose teeth.

5.  Clenching and bruxism.

Her problems became significantly worse by 1997-1998, and she saw Dr.
Rick Riggs here in Dallas and was treated with splint therapy from 1998
to 2005. She then had orthodontic treatment from 2005 to 2008 with Dr.
Dean Jensen for a year and then by Dr. Mai Tran. She had some gum
grafting done in 2005 by Dr. Glover. She gets monthly massages which do
help her. She currently takes the following medications:

1.  Synthroid.

2.  Paxil.

3.  Flecainide (for heart palpitations).

She gets headaches only about once a month now primarily in the left
side in the frontal and temporal area at about a level of 8. She rates
her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at
4, disability at 5. She has right-sided earaches, but no tinnitus nor
vertigo. Other joints that bother her include predominantly just her
knees. She is aware of severe nighttime clenching and bruxism and she
also does that during the day as well.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Claudia has good left-to-right
facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 18 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is about zero. The maxillary midline and chin midline are
pretty much on the facial midline. Mandibular dental midline may be
about 1 mm to the left. In profile view, she has fairly good facial
balance. In the lower arch, Claudia has all of her teeth back through
the second molars. She has a little bit of gingival recession around the
lower incisors, particularly in the right one. In the upper arch, she
has had second bicuspids extracted. She has a Class I cuspid and molar
relationship. In the upper segment bicuspid areas, she still has some
spacing that could not be closed. She has an anterior deep bite of 2 to
3 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively healthy. Uvula is just
mildly elongated and soft palate appears moderately elongated. Fascial
pillars are mildly constricted. Tonsils are relatively normal.
Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off towards the left
side. Turbinates are moderately enlarged and appear they may block some
of the nasal airway. To palpation, Claudia has some mild tenderness in
the temporalis and masseter muscle areas and moderate in the left
retromandibular area. On opening, she has crepitation in the left TMJ
and a opening click in the right joint at 5-10 mm and a closing click at
probably about 5 mm. Maximal incisal opening is about 45 mm, and she
could open about 30 mm without significant pain. Excursion movement to
the right 10 mm, to the left 12 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. She has crowns on the maxillary molars and first bicuspids. She
has root canals on the mandibular central incisors. Sinuses appear
relatively clear, but turbinates appear enlarged. Joints look a little
bit arthritic.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear
quite large and obstructive to the nasal area. Septum is deviated off
towards the left side.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear, but the turbinates are
extremely large and appear to block off most of the nasal airway.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that she has advanced arthritis in the left
joint with significant anterior beaking present. There appears to be
significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint space. Articular
eminence appears fairly shallow and it also appears to be arthritic.

Right joint shows a condyle that appears arthritic as well with some
significant anterior beaking and actually peaking of the condyle on the
anterior aspect. Joint space appears decreased superiorly and
posteriorly. Articular eminence is moderately shallow. Anterior joint
space appears to be decreased. Out laterally, there appears to be
decreased joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows significant arthritic changes in the condyle
as well as in the fossa. Lateral rim of the fossa extends inferiorly
probably about 3 to 4 mm. There appears to be bone-on-bone contact at
the lateral rim of the fossa with the lateral aspect of the joint. There
is a pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. There is 70 degrees of
vertical joint space.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic, but not to the
level of the opposite one. There is decreased vertical joint space
particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Claudia has basically a very
slight Class II skeletal relationship. There may be a mild increased
occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal airway, however, does look pretty
with an oropharyngeal airway about 12 mm at the soft palate level and
decreases at the base of tongue to about 5 to 6 mm.

Basic diagnoses for Claudia would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis being significantly worse on the right side
    than the left side.

2.  TMJ pain.

3.  Headaches.

4.  Myofascial pain.

5.  Hypertrophied nasal turbinates.

6.  Nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Medications: Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

4.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint
          prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    c.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
