KRISTEN VALANOSKI 06/24/2009

Kristen is 25 years old. Kristen was referred here by Dr. William Hang.
Kristen has been aware of having TMJ problems since about the age of 10
years old in 1993. It did not really become a significant issue until
she was about 20 years old when her pain levels began to escalate fairly
significantly. Primary concerns Kristen has at this time include the
following:

1.  TMJ pain.

2.  Headaches.

3.  Myofascial pain.

4.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

5.  Difficulties breathing through the nose creating predominantly mouth
    breathing.

6.  Teeth and jaws do not fit together.

7.  She does at times get twitching of her facial muscles.

Kristen’s initial problems began at the age of 10 and could have been
induced by a lot of stress that she was under at that time or other
factors. Following the escalation of her pain and headaches at the age
of 20, she has undergone some significant treatment attempts. This
includes the following:

1.  Upper and lower jaw splint devices that I have not seen before that
    she wore from 2004 to 2005 for 1 year.

2.  Since 2006, she has had 4 additional splints. She basically wears
    through them and then requires new ones to be made.

3.  Acupuncture in 2008 for a few months.

4.  She has seen 2 different chiropractic doctors between 2005 and 2007
    for treatments without any successful improvement.

5.  She had physical therapy for a year from 2008 to 2009, again without
    any significant improvement.

Kristen rates her headaches at a level of 6 throughout her head area
that is fairly constant and can exacerbate to a level of 8 to 9. She
rates her TMJ pain at 7, average daily pain at 8, jaw function at 5,
diet at 5, and disability at 8. The only medication she currently takes
is Motrin, although she has tried Vicodin and pain medications with
codeine that have been ineffectual for her. She gets earaches
occasionally, no tinnitus, but vertigo with no hearing loss. Other
joints that bother her include her knees, hips, ankles, and possibly her
neck vertebrae. She is aware of clenching her teeth at night time and
also during the day.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Kristen has fairly good facial
symmetry in the upper and lower third face, and there may be some slight
asymmetry in the mandible. Upper lip length is about 21 mm. Upper tooth
lip relationship is about 5 mm. The maxillary dental midline is just
slightly off to the right side about 1 mm. The mandibular dental midline
is about 2 mm off to the right side, and the chin is probably 2 to 3 mm
off to the right side. Kristen has about 12 mm of lip incompetence. In
profile view, Kristen has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of
probably about 3-4 mm. The chin is retruded by about 18 mm. Lower third
face appears elongated. She has a high occlusal plane angle mandibular
morphology. Intraorally, she has all of her teeth back through the
second molars. Lower molars are tipped lingually along the right
bicuspid slightly. She has a transverse and narrow lower arch. She has
some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch, but has good attached
gingiva. There is a slight accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.
In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the second
molars. She has a slight reverse curve of Wilson present. Oropharyngeal
tissues look relatively normal in structure and in health. Intranasally,
as best I could see, the septum appears reasonably straight. The
turbinates appear moderate in size particularly on the left side. The
right one is not quite as large as the left one. Kristen has a Class III
cuspid relationship bilaterally by probably 3 mm or so. She has an
anterior open bite. She has an end-on incisor AP relationship and
posteriorly it appears that the maxillary and mandibular posterior teeth
are tipped lingually. Her Class III occlusion appears to be splint
induced. She does have a slight transverse cant in the occlusal plane
with the right side being about 1 to 1.5 mm lower than the left side.
The mandibular left cuspid is about 1 or 2 mm posterior to the right
cuspid. To palpation, she has moderate to high moderate pain throughout
the head and neck area with the worse being in the TMJ area and the
shoulder area. On opening, she does have a click in the right joint at
about 30 mm of opening and a closing click at 15 mm. The left side
functions reasonably smoothly, although she feels sort of like a rubbing
kind of noise on the left side. On opening, the mandible does shift off
towards the right side about 3-4 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of all teeth
actually erupted in including the third molars. Sinuses look relatively
clear. It is difficult to evaluate the TMJ joints. Styloid processes are
moderately long.

Coronal view shows that she does have enlarged turbinates that fill most
of the nasal cavity with the right side being worse than the left side.
Septum appears reasonably straight and sinuses appear relatively clear.

Axial view also shows that anteriorly the turbinates have been reduced
particularly on the left side, but posteriorly the turbinates are quite
large particularly on the right side. Sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ coronal view shows condyle that appears to have a reasonable
shape to it. It may be a little bit narrow mediolaterally. Joint space
vertically is reasonable except at the lateral rim of the fossa where it
is a little bit narrow. The lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly
about 3 mm.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears slightly smaller
than the opposite side. Joint space appears fairly well balance. There
is a little bit decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of the joint
perhaps in one view.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears to be posteriorly
positioned in the fossa in some of the views. Articular eminence has a
moderate inclination. A little sclerosis on the head of the condyle.
There may be a little flattening of the condyle in the superior aspect
towards the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has a pseudocyst in the
head. There is some anterior beaking present, and there actually appears
to be a decreased anterior joint space between the articular eminence
and the condyle.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Kristen has a moderately
high occlusal plane angle, a Class III occlusion with a Class II
skeletal relationship. She has anterior vertical maxillary excess and AP
mandibular deficiency. The airway space appears somewhat constricted
with it being about 10 mm at the soft palate and at the base of the
tongue measures about 8 mm down to less than 4 mm of airway space. She
has a significant lip incompetence with anterior vertical maxillary
excess. Maximal incisal opening is 46 mm, opening without discomfort 28
mm. Excursion movement to the right 7 mm, to the left 6 mm.

Basic diagnoses for Kristen would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation with
    reduction on the right side and without reduction on the left side.

2.  AP vertical maxillary hyperplasia, but AP and posterior vertical
    hypoplasia.

3.  AP mandibular hypoplasia, but anterior vertical hyperplasia.

4.  Anterior open bite.

5.  Class III occlusion.

6.  High occlusal plane angle.

7.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm at the
    base of the tongue (normal dimension 11 mm).

8.  TMJ pain.

9.  Myofascial pain.

10. Headaches.

11. Hypertrophied turbinates creating nasal airway obstruction.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  MRI of left and right TMJ.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors roots
        mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental
        osteotomies if they are necessary.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Try to expand the arch.
        Slenderize the lower anterior teeth removing no more than 2 mm
        to correct for a 1.5 to 2 mm tooth size discrepancy.

3.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

4.  Surgical option 1.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
        Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

    d.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    e.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    f.  Anterior mandibular ostectomy to advance the chin forward and
        reduce it vertically.

    g.  Consider removing the third molars.

5.  Surgical option 2.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ disc repositioning and stabilization with Mitek
        anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
        in a counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
        counterclockwise direction.

    d.  Bilateral turbinectomies.

    e.  Consider possible removal of third molars.

    f.  Anterior mandibular ostectomy to advance the chin forward and
        reduce it vertically.

6.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
