STEPHANIE TEAGUE 10/22/2009

Stephanie is 20 years old and referred by Dr. Hilton Goldreich and Dr.
Cliff Alexander. She is currently seeing Dr. Cliff Alexander for
orthodontic treatment. Stephanie began having TMJ problems at about the
age of 12 of unknown etiology. She did have an MRI when she was 14 that
showed she had an anteriorly displaced disc on the right side with some
arthritis and nonreducing discs. Prior to the onset of her TMJ problems,
she did have phase 1 orthodontics from about the age of 9 to 12 years.
She was treated by Dr. Mardaga, whom the family is very pleased with and
he apparently did a palatal expansion and she was then put on hold for
orthodontics because of her TMJ problems. She wore head gear for almost
2 years. She then basically was put on hold orthodontically because of
her TMJ issues and did not finally get to wearing braces again until
about 18 months ago. In the meantime, she has had some ongoing TMJ
treatment. She had splints x2 from about the age of 13 to 15. In 2004,
she had arthrocentesis to the right joint only. She has had an
electrophoresis and NSAIDS. With the arthrocentesis she had in 2004, she
had steroids injected in the joint. She began her orthodontic treatment
with Dr. Leiker in The Woodlands 18 months ago and just this past month
transferred to Dr. Cliff Alexander.

Stephanie takes the following medications:

1.  Nexium 20 mg b.i.d.

2.  Synthroid 50 mcg q.d.

3.  Singulair 10 mg q.h.s.

4.  Allegra 180 mg q.d.

5.  Celebrex 100 mg b.i.d.

6.  Nasonex nasal spray.

7.  Vicodin 5 mg q.h.s.

8.  Skelaxin q.h.s.

Stephanie rates her headaches that she gets in the temporal area only at
a level of 1. She rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 4, jaw
function, diet, and disability all at 4. She has no problems with
earaches, tinnitus, vertigo, nor hearing loss. The only joint that
bothers her is her right shoulder. She does have the following medical
conditions:

1.  GERD.

2.  Chronic sinusitis.

3.  Hypothyroidism.

4.  TMJ problems.

She is aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night.

Primary concerns that Stephanie has include the following:

1.  TMJ pain.

2.  Bite position is off.

3.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Stephanie has fairly good
symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is 21 mm.
Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is
pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is
about 1 mm off to the right and chin may be off 2-3 mm off to the right.
In profile, Stephanie has about 4 mm of AP maxillary deficiency and
probably about 6 mm of AP mandibular deficiency, although her jaw
structures are in reasonably good balance. Chin necklines and chin neck
angle appear relatively normal. Intraorally, she has all of her lower
teeth back through the second molars. She has lingual braces in the
upper and lower arch. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back
through the second molars. In centric relation, her lower dental midline
is 2 mm off towards the right side and the chin is probably 3 to 4 mm
off to the right side. She has a Class II end-on cuspid relationship on
the right side being probably close to 4 mm Class II and on the left
side she is probably 1-2 mm Class II. She has about a 1 mm overbite
relationship and probably 2 mm overjet. She has an almost 3 mm
transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 3 mm
higher than the left side. She has lingual and buccal tads in and around
the first molar area. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal in
architecture and texture. Tonsils are mildly enlarged. She has had
previous nasal surgery to treat her chronic sinus problems and she has
had a partial reduction of the turbinates, but it looks like it was just
the anterior part that was addressed and not the middle or posterior
part. Apparently, she had some work done on her septum as well.
Stephanie has had her wisdom teeth removed. To palpation, Stephanie has
high moderate pain over the TMJs and moderate pain over the masseters,
retromandibular area, mild tenderness over the temporalis and shoulders.
Incisal opening is 51 mm and she can open 29 mm reasonably comfortably.
Excursion movements are 8 mm in each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. Turbinates appear moderate in size. The right joint looks
somewhat arthritic. The septum appears reasonably straight.

Coronal view shows the presence of tads in the maxilla. Sinuses look
clear. Turbinates are quite large and appear to block a good portion of
the airway.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large. Sinuses are clear.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show some arthritic changes associated with
the condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep. Joint space
looks reasonably good, just some slight decreased posterior joint space.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show that there is some slight arthritic
changes that have occurred in the condyle with some loss of vertical
volume as well as some anterior beaking. Articular eminence is
moderately steep.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has fairly good mediolateral
width. Joint space appears fairly equal and balance, although could be
slightly decreased vertically.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is smaller in size than the
left one with decreased vertical height and mediolateral width. Joint
space actually looks fairly good.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has over-angulation of
the lower incisors but appears to have a Class III skeletal and fairly
close to a Class I occlusal relationship. Occlusal plan may be must
moderately high. Oropharyngeal airway measures about 7 mm at the soft
palate level and probably 7-8 mm at the base of the tongue. There is a
tooth size discrepancy with a Bolton’s difference of 2 mm.

Basic diagnoses for Stephanie would be as follows:

1.  Right TMJ reactive arthritis with articular disc dislocation without
    reduction and with significant degenerative changes.

2.  Left TMJ mild arthritis and articular disc anteriorly dislocated
    with early reduction.

3.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

4.  Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.

5.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the right side being 3 mm
    higher than the left side.

6.  Class II end-on occlusion being worse on the right side as compared
    to the left side.

7.  Mandibular dental midline shifted to the right 2 mm.

8.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

9.  Nasal airway obstruction.

10. Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

11. TMJ pain.

12. Myofascial pain.

13. Tooth size discrepancy with 2+ mm Bolton’s difference.

14. Over angulation of lower incisors.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the
          lower anterior teeth removing at least 2 mm of tooth structure
          to correct for a tooth size discrepancy as well as to decrease
          the over angulated lower anterior teeth.

2.  Surgery Stage 1: Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and
    ligament repair with Mitek anchors.

3.  Presurgical orthodontics: Continue with the alignment and leveling
    of the arches.

4.  Surge Stage II:

    a.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, down
          graft it slightly posterior, and correct for the asymmetry.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to correct the facial
          asymmetry and advance the mandible.

    c.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
