ROBBIN TAYLOR 01/20/2009

Robbin is 34 years old. She was referred by Dr. Sarah Satow in Eagle,
Idaho, and also by Dr. Jeffrey Moses. In 1979, Robbin had open heart
surgery. She had coarctation of the aorta. In 1990, she had a fall
sustaining an injury to her jaws and to a knee. She subsequently
developed an ankylosis. In 1991, Dr. Jeffrey Moses took her to surgery
and performed TMJ arthroplasties and inserted Silastic blocks. Robbin
has been essentially pain free since that time until the last 5 weeks.
In 1992, she was in an automobile accident and sustained maxillary and
orbital fractures that were treated with open reductions. The joints
were not affected in that accident. Therefore, she has been subsequently
pain free with reasonable function for the past 17 years. About 5 weeks
ago, however, she began developing pain on the left side which
eventually developed into swelling and an infection. She was initially
placed on Cleocin and Flagyl. However, she had an allergic reaction to
the Clindamycin and she had peripheral neuropathy associated with the
Flagyl. She subsequently has been placed on Doxycycline 100 mg b.i.d.
Culture and sensitivity was done in the left TMJ area, and it was found
that she had a few Staphylococcus aureus coagulase positive bacteria
present. However, prior to the Cleocin and Flagyl, she was on 10-day
treatment with Levaquin.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Robbin has good facial balance
and symmetry. She has fullness in the left preauricular area.
intraorally, she has all of her teeth in the lower arch except for the
left cuspid, first bicuspid which has been replaced by a partial. In the
upper arch, she is missing a right central incisor and a first molar
replaced with a partial denture. She basically has a good Class I cuspid
molar relationship with about a 3 mm overbite. Incisal opening today was
about 18 mm. She used to run around 25 to 26 mm of opening routinely
until these last few weeks. She could open at least 35 mm for the first
10 years and has decreased since then. Intranasally, today the right
turbinate appears somewhat enlarged, at least in the front. On I-CAT,
however, the left side looks enlarged. The septum looks reasonably
straight at the bottom, although there is a septal spur high on the
septum.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows that she had had previous
coronoidectomies. There is virtually no condylar structure left at all.
There is heterotopic bone around the remaining neck of the condyle as
well as in the fossa. There are wires in the maxilla from the previous
facial fractures. She is missing mandibular right cuspid, first
bicuspid, and the maxillary right central incisor and first molar, but
with the second molar drifted forward. There is severe destruction in
the joint area.

Axial view shows that the left turbinate is extremely large, and the
right one looks more normal. Sinuses look clear. In the coronal view,
the turbinate appears quite large and at least in this cut, there is a
little bit of a spur going off actually to the right side, although the
right nasal airway looks good.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that severe arthritic changes
associated with it as well as in the fossa with heterotopic bone
formation in the fossa. There are areas of bone-on-bone contact and some
areas that appear as though there is bony fusion. The Silastic has been
displaced out laterally to where it intercedes between less than half of
the condylar stump/heterotopic bone formation within the joint. It is
this implant that is infected.

In the right coronal view, there is heterotopic bone formation that is
going around the medial side of the Silastic implant. The Silastic
implant is a little bit better positioned overall compared to the
opposite side. There is heterotopic bone development in both the fossa
and in the condylar area.

Left TMJ sagittal view shows that there is severe arthritic changes. The
functioning stump of the condyle is quite broad anteroposteriorly.
Towards the lateral aspect of the joint, the implant can be seen, yet
there is some heterotopic bone growth around the margins of the Silastic
implant. Over medially, there are areas where there could be bony fusion
present.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows severe degenerative changes in the fossa
as well as on the condylar stump. In some areas, there is significantly
decreased joint space and almost bone-on-bone contact. The implant can
be seen in the middle of the lateral aspect of the joint with
heterotopic bone that is going around the margins of the Silastic.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has surprisingly good AP
position of the maxilla and mandible. Oropharyngeal airway measures
about 5 to 6 mm at the soft palate level and at the base of the tongue
measures about 7 to 8 mm.

Basic diagnoses for Robbin would be as follows:

1.  Infected left TMJ and mandibular foreign body (Silastic implant).

2.  Laterally displaced Silastic implant in the left TMJ.

3.  Bilateral TMJ bony ankylosis.

4.  Bilateral TMJ extensive heterotopic bone formation affecting the
    fossa as well as the mandible.

5.  Pain.

6.  Severe limited jaw function with an incisal opening of 18 mm.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Surgery Stage 1.

    a.  Removal of displaced and infected foreign body (Silastic
        implant) from left jaw and jaw joint area.

    b.  Debridement of left jaw and jaw joint area.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints.

3.  Surgery Stage 2.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction with total joint prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral extensive debridement for removal of heterotopic bone.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.

4.  Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.

5.  Removal of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.

ROBBIN TAYLOR 01/20/2009

Robbin has been approved for surgery. Therefore, we will admit her
tomorrow and she will have surgery tomorrow late afternoon, early
evening for removal of the infected implant. A history and physical was
performed. Consent form reviewed and signed. I had previously done my
evaluation when I evaluated her this morning. She is ready for surgery
tomorrow.
