SHARON WATKINS 06/22/2009

Sharon is 48 years old. Referred by Dr. Don H. Lowrance, MS DDS, 4707
Everhart Plaza, Suite 101, Corpus Christi, TX 78411.

Sharon had orthodontics as a child with 4 bicuspid extractions. She went
a number of years without noting any problems. She did have a cocaine
addiction problem in her late teens into her early 20s and she is aware
at that time of doing some severe clenching and bruxing. It was not
until she was about 35 that she really began developing TMJ problems.
She has very nicely outlined her treatments to date. She has had at
least 4 to 5 different splints. In January of 2001, she had
arthrocentesis by Dr. B. D. Tiner. In March 2001, Dr. Tiner performed:

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthrectomy.

2.  Bilateral TMJ eminectomies.

3.  Bilateral TMJ anterior and lateral disc plication with anterior
    release.

By 2003, she began popping and having discomfort. She has through
numerous evaluations and treatments. She was retreated orthodontically
beginning in 2004 and she wore the appliances for 2 years, finishing in
2006. She then got 11 crowns, but this has not corrected her problem
either. She received her last new splint in March 2009. Sharon gets
headaches at about a level of 6 bilaterally through the frontal temporal
and posterior head area predominantly. She rates her TMJ pain at 7,
average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7, diet at 4, disability at 8.
She has no earaches, occasional tinnitus, no vertigo, and her hearing
will go in and out, but no permanent hearing loss. Other joints that
bother her include primarily just her knees. She is aware of clenching
and bruxing at night time and also during the day. She does have some
anxiety factors.

She takes the following medications:

1.  Estrogen.

2.  Ambien CR 6.25 mg q.h.s.

3.  Nasonex 50 mcg q.d.

4.  Advil four 800 mg q.d.

5.  Celexa 20 mg q.d.

6.  Amitriptyline q.h.s.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Sharon has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length measures about 23 mm.
Upper tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary, mandibular,
and chin midline are all pretty much aligned with each other. In profile
view, Sharon has some AP deficiency of the maxilla of about 2-3 mm. Chin
is AP deficient by probably 8-10 mm. Chin neckline is somewhat shorter,
though chin neck angle is reasonably well defined. Intraorally, Sharon
is missing the lower probably first bicuspids and the upper first
bicuspids. She has a basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship.
Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy and tonsils have been removed.
Intranasally, the left turbinate is just mildly enlarged. The septum may
be deviated just slightly off to the left side. She has an anterior arch
septal perforation of probably 8-10 mm. Sharon does not appear as she
has significant nasal airway obstruction. Sharon does have about a 2-mm
vertical overbite relationship. To palpation, she has some moderate pain
over the TMJs and milder pain over the retromandibular area, but no
other pain around the head and neck area to palpation. Maximal incisal
opening is 42 mm, but 24 mm without discomfort. Excursion movement to
the right 4 mm, to the left 3 mm. With jaw function, Sharon has
significant crepitation in the right joint and to a lesser extent in the
left joint. She said she believes she has had the crepitation in the
right joint ever since her surgery in 2001. I gave Sharon a prescription
for Klonopin 1-mg tablet, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill
x5.

When she was about 24 or 25 years old, Sharon had sinus surgery that
included removal of nasal polyps, septoplasty, and antral windows
created.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars and the absence of the bicuspid in all 4 quadrants. Condyles look
arthritic, with the right one being worse than the left one. Sinuses
look relatively clear and turbinates appear moderate in size.

Coronal view shows that there is some slight thickening of the sinus
membrane on the left maxillary sinus. Septum is deviated. There is some
turbinate on the right side, but at least with the cut that we have here
there is no turbinate posteriorly.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are essentially nonexistent for the
most part except for a little bit on the posterior of the right side.
Perforation is seen anteriorly through the septum. Sinuses appear
relatively clear.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show a condyle that is arthritic. There is
decrease superior and posterior joint spaces. There is anterior beaking
present. There appears to be some small erosions in the surface of the
condyle. It appears there may be some erosions even in the fossa
perhaps. The articular eminence is moderate in inclination..

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears more arthritic and
has more advanced arthritis as compared to the opposite side. There is
some decrease in joint space particularly at the lateral aspect of the
joint where it appears there may be bone-on-bone contact. There is
cavitation and erosion in the condylar head. The fossa appears arthritic
with some ebernation in the bone on both the condyle and the fossa.
There is significant anterior beaking. Towards the medial side of the
joint, there is a depression in the head of the condyle and
significantly degenerated changes.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic with
degenerative changes in it. There appears to be bone-on-bone contact
more towards the medial side of the joint as compared to the lateral.
There appears to be degenerated changes in the fossa as well.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has advanced arthritic
changes. There are osteophytes and erosions present in the head of the
condyle and they are the same in the fossa. There appears to be
significant bone-on-bone contact within the fossa.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that the maxilla and mandible are
retruded. There is a moderately high occlusal plane angle. The
oropharyngeal airway measures about 4 mm at the soft palate level and
also about the same at the base of the tongue.

Basic diagnoses for Sharon would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis.

2.  AP and posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

3.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

4.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

5.  TMJ pain.

6.  Headaches.

7.  Myofascial pain.

8.  Missing four bicuspids, one from each quadrant.

9.  High occlusal plane angle.

10. Transverse narrowness of maxillary and mandibular arches.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Medications: Klonopin 1-mg tablets, dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet
    q.h.s., refill x5.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Try to slowly expand the lower
          arch to increase the transverse width between the teeth on the
          cuspid through the second molars.

3.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

4.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
          Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    c.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance slightly, down graft
          posteriorly, and rotate in a counterclockwise direction.

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
