ALEX VANGALIS 10/08/2008

Alex is 20 years old, referred by Dr. Cliff Alexander. Alex has a severe
form of Treacher-Collins syndrome. He has had numerous previous
surgeries including orbital reconstruction, lateral canthopexies,
rhinoplasty, and he has had previous orthognathic surgery on the jaws
performed at least twice before, once when Alex was 15 and the last time
was in June 2007. Alex does have a tracheostomy that has been present
since he was 5 days old and it is still a functional stoma. Alex has no
problems with headaches, TMJ pain, or myofascial pain. He rates his jaw
function at 6 and disability at 6. He has severe airway issues. He has
severe difficulties breathing through his nose. Apparently, he breathes
primarily through his mouth or through his tracheal stoma. He does
snore. He does not appear to have any daytime tiredness, but does have
moderate sleep apnea and probably be even more severe if the tracheal
stoma was not still open. He sleeps on his stomach.

He has had the following surgeries:

1.  5/6/88 tracheostomy.

2.  5/6/88 gastrostomy.

3.  July 2003, craniofacial surgery, reconstructive rhinoplasty.

4.  June 2007, additional reconstructive jaw surgery.

Primary concerns that they have is Alex’s biting and eating difficulties
and his severe airway problems. He has been diagnosed with
Treacher-Collins syndrome, but also has Asperger’s syndrome and he also
is hearing impaired.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Alex has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. He shows a significant amount of sclera.
Eyelids are folded inferiorly. Lateral canthal areas are inferiorly
positioned. Alex is missing both lower second bicuspids. Up above, he
has all of his teeth back through the second molars present. It is very
difficult to evaluate the oropharyngeal areas. It appears that he has
hyperplastic tonsils as best as I can see, but it is very, very
difficult to see back there. It is difficult to evaluate the length of
the soft palate, length of the uvula, etc. Fascial pillars are likely
constricted. Intranasally, the turbinates appear moderate in size. The
septum appears deviated a little bit off towards the left side
anteriorly. In his profile view, his maxilla is retruded by probably
about 5 mm, but the chin is retruded by at least 30 mm. Infraorbital
areas are severely hypoplastic in both the AP and lateral projection. He
is missing some of his eyelashes on his eyelids.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows severe malformation of the
mandibular rami likely due to the previous orthognathic surgical
procedures. He has bone plates in the zygomatic arch area. He is missing
mandibular second bicuspids and third molars. In the upper arch, he has
got all of his teeth including the third molar on the left side, but
missing the third molar on the right side. The mother is congenitally
missing mandibular second bicuspids also. Sinuses are probably quite
small, but appear clear.

Waters view shows malformation of the orbits. The left side of the nose
appears obliterated, although on the right side it appears there is a
passable airway. Sinuses appear quite small in size. He has digital
markings on the skull. He has bone plates in the zygoma area and
temporal bone area.

Tomogram of the left TMJ area shows virtually no evidence of a condyle.
The ramus is extremely narrow anteroposteriorly, again in part likely
due to the previous osteotomy performed.

Right TMJ tomogram likewise a very poorly formed TMJ area. He has an
extremely high occlusal plane angle and mandibular plane angle. On
opening, there appears to be lack of significant translatory movement.

Clinically, he appears to have 40 mm of incisal opening and about 5 mm
of excursion movement in each direction. Alex has a dual bite in centric
relation. He has an anterior open bite of probably about least 2 mm and
probably a full Class II cuspid relationship. He tends to posture the
mandible forward which gets him into a little bit better bite
relationship.

Basic diagnoses for Alex would be as follows:

1.  Severe Treacher-Collins syndrome.

2.  Bilateral severe deformed with possible progressive resorption of
    the mandibular condyles.

3.  Severe AP mandibular hypoplasia.

4.  Severe posterior maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  Slight AP maxillary deficiency.

6.  Anterior mandibular vertical excess.

7.  Transverse maxillary deficiency

8.  Severe AP microgenia.

9.  High occlusal plane angle of 27 degrees (normal angle is 8 degrees).

10. Over-angulation of lower incisors.

11. Multiple spaces in lower arch.

12. Missing mandibular second bicuspids.

13. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2 mm
    (normal dimension is 11 mm).

14. Severe periorbital deformity.

15. Probable nasal airway obstruction related to hypertrophied
    turbinates and/or deviated septum.

16. Left posterior cross bite and end-on incisor relationship.

17. Bilateral ear deformities.

18. Residual external nasal deformity.

19. Hypertrophied tonsils.

Recommended treatment for Alex would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Extract maxillary second bicuspids.

    b.  Align and level maxillary arch closing the extraction space. Try
          to lose some posterior anchorage so the upper incisor is not
          over retracted.

    c.  Continue to align and level lower arch closing the spacing.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol) to evaluate
    for possible nonunion in the ramus area as well as status of TMJ and
    basal skull anatomy.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ and mandibular reconstruction with mandibular
          advancement utilizing TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the buttock).

    c.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to down graft the posterior
          aspect of the maxilla, expand, and advance in a
          counterclockwise direction.

    e.  Large genioplasty and augmentation of about 15 mm.

    f.  Probable nasal turbinectomies and possible nasal septoplasty
          (depending on clinical and radiographic assessment).

    g.  Bilateral tonsillectomy (by Dr. Weprin).

4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5. Surgery Stage 2.

a. Orbital and zygomatic reconstruction.

b. Consider external rhinoplasty.

c. Consider ear reconstruction.
