DEBRA WALTRIP 08/26/2009

Debra is 46 years old and referred by Dr. Richard F. Jackson, 2525 K
Street, Suite 101, Sacramento, CA 95816.

Debra’s problems began when she was 17 years old in 1980 when she was
involved in a motor vehicle accident and went through the windshield
sustaining injuries to her jaw joints as well as significant facial
injuries. She has had multiple plastic surgical procedures for
reconstruction. Relative to her jaw joints, she had joint problems
immediately after the injury. In 1985, Dr. John Dann performed TMJ disc
repositioning and arthroplasties on her. On January 14, 1986, she was
treated for the next several surgeries by Dr. Lou Gallia. On January 14,
1986, he performed bilateral TMJ fascia grafts; on March 13, 1987,
bilateral arthroplasties; November 23, 1987, bilateral arthroplasty with
dermal grafts; December 11, 1991, bilateral arthroplasties and dermal
grafts; March 23, 1993, bilateral arthroscopy; in 1993 bilateral
temporal fascial flaps. She has had physical therapy x3 over the years.
She had orthodontics from 1989 to 1994. She had splints from 1982 to
1987. The splints made her situation worse. After the last surgery, her
bite was open anteriorly, but the orthodontist was able to close it and
she has remained fairly comfortable through the years until more
recently. Approximately 4 years ago, Debbie got pneumonia that she had
for about 4 months and was coughing constantly. She believes that the
onset of the pneumonia was related to some scented candles that she was
exposed to. During that 4-month period is when she began developing
pain. Then for a few years, it waxed and waned relative to pain. For the
past 2-1/2 years, she has had almost continuous pain and continuous ear
problems, particularly on the left side. Debbie feels as though her bite
is changing. Debra currently rates her headache levels on an average day
at about a level of 8 in the frontal and temporal area. She rates her
TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 7, jaw function, diet, and
disability at 7. She has earaches constantly in the left side and
constant left-sided tinnitus. She gets vertigo and has hearing loss.

She has been diagnosed with asthma, hypothyroidism, and multiple
allergies. She takes the following medications:

1.  Vicodin 5 mg b.i.d.

2.  Synthroid 0.25 mg.

3.  Dyazide (diuretic).

4.  Singulair 10 mg.

5.  Xopenex inhaler.

She has no other joint problems. She is not aware of clenching or
bruxing of her teeth. Debbie has moderate to severe snoring, moderate to
severe daytime somnolence, and probably has sleep apnea as she does
awake at times unable to catch her breath. She has a moderate sleep
disorder and at nighttime breathes predominantly through her mouth. They
had attempted to do a sleep study on her two different times, but she is
not able to sleep well enough for them to obtain any significant data.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Debbie has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about 2.5 mm. The maxillary and mandibular
dental midlines appear to be slightly off towards the right side maybe
about 1 mm, but the maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are fairly
well aligned with each other and actually are fairly close to being on
the facial midline. Upper lip tubercle is shifted a little bit towards
the left side about 2 mm. In profile, the maxilla is AP deficient by 4
to 5 mm and the chin is retruded by probably 12-15 mm. The chin neckline
and chin neck angle is not well defined. Intraorally, Debbie has all of
her lower teeth back through the second molars. She has some gingival
inflammation. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through
the second molars. She has basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship
with about a 1-mm overbite. Transversely, the maxilla and mandible are
fairly level. Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy.
Intranasally, it is difficult to evaluate the turbinates from the front.
Septum appears reasonably straight. She has a moderately wide columella
and the nostrils are narrow and the luminal valves are somewhat
collapsed. Using the nasal speculum to hold the nostrils open
significantly improved her airway which means that some of the airway
obstruction is at the nostril area. To palpation, she has severe pain
over the left TMJ and high moderate pain over the masseters, right TMJ,
and left styloid area. To the rest of the head and neck, she has
basically moderate pain to palpation. Maximal incisal voluntary opening
is15 mm. Excursion movement to the right about 1.5 mm, to the left 1 mm.
She has crepitus in her joints.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows she is missing her third molars.
She has an implant replacing mandibular right first molar. She has
crowns on several of her posterior teeth. She has severe arthritis in
her jaw joints. She has root canals on the left maxillary and mandibular
first molars, mandibular right second bicuspid, and perhaps the right
maxillary first molar.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates actually are
normal in size.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses are clear and the turbinates are
normal in size.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show that she severe has arthritis in the
joints. She has lost vertical volume and has anterior beaking. The
articular eminence has been removed. Joint space is decreased.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show a loss of condylar volume and severe
arthritis. There is anterior beaking and some roughness across the top
of the condyle. There is decreased joint space vertically. The articular
eminence has been removed.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show that she has severe arthritis that
appears to be affecting the fossa as well as the condyle. There is
significantly decreased bone space and it appears there could be
bone-on-bone articulation. Lateral rim of the fossa is fairly flat.

Right TMJ coronal tomograms show that there are significant degenerative
changes on the condyle as well as in the fossa. Some medial extension
appears to have almost bone-on-bone contact. Lateral rim of the fossa is
fairly flat.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a retruded maxilla
and mandible with a moderately high occlusal plane angle. Oropharyngeal
airway measures probably about 3.5 mm at the soft palate level and about
2.5 mm at the base of the tongue.

Basic diagnoses for Debbie would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis.

2.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

3.  Maxillary AP and posterior vertical hypoplasia.

4.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 2.5
    mm (normal AP dimension equals 11 mm).

5.  Severe TMJ pain.

6.  Headaches.

7.  Myofascial pain.

8.  Wide columella and narrow nostrils creating nasal airway
    obstruction.

9.  Earaches.

10. Tinnitus.

11. Severe snoring.

12. Daytime somnolence.

13. Sleep apnea.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with
          bilateral sternoclavicular grafts.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts.

    d.  Reconstruct columella.

Debra has multiple allergies and hypersensitivities and refuses to even
consider total joint prostheses even though they would provide her the
best treatment result. I discussed testing to determine if she is
hypersensitive and desensitization procedures, but she refuses and
insists that autogenous tissues be used for her TMJ reconstruction. I
warned her of the complications and that it may not work and there is
significant risk of occlusal and skeletal instability with skeletal and
occlusal relapse. She still insists that she wants the autogenous tissue
grafts. She understands that we have to use bone plates and screws to
stabilize the grafts and she may need additional operations to remove
the plates. She understands. The outcome will not be as good as compared
to using the total joint prostheses.
