TOM WEBER 06/01/2009

Tom is 39 years old and is a self referral. Tom’s primary concerns are
severe sleep apnea. He has had sleep apnea ever since he was a child he
believes. He had adenoids removed at the age of 6 and tonsils at the age
of 25. He began CPAP machine in March 2006. He had pillar procedure done
in the spring 2006, but then the sticks became protruded and infected
and he had them removed later that summer. In August 2006, he started to
use a PM positioner. In June 2007, he had a tongue base somnoplasty.
Sleep studies continue to show that he had severe sleep apnea. In
February 2008, he had a Z-palatoplasty and a tongue base somnoplasty
again performed as well as turbinate reduction. In November 2008, his
father died at the age of 67 from complications due in part to sleep
apnea. He also has some uncles that have died at a younger than
predicted age, even in the 50s, that may have been due to sleep apnea.
Tom is unable to tolerate the CPAP machine, and, in the 3 years that he
has had the device, there is only a handful of nights that he has been
able to make it through keeping the machine on and at these times his
sleep was aided with either Lunesta or Ambien.

Tom gets headaches at a level of 3 in the top of the temple area and on
top of the head. No TMJ pain or other myofascial pain. Jaw function,
diet, and disability are at zero. He takes Allegra D 1 tablet q.d. and
Singulair 10 mg q.d. No history of earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or
hearing loss. The only joint that bothers him is his right big toe as a
result of playing football on artificial turf. He is not aware of
clenching or bruxism.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. Tom has good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper
lip length is about 26 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about -2 mm.
The midlines are appropriately aligned. In profile, he has got about a
2-3 mm AP deficiency in the upper lip and maxilla and 15-18 mm in AP
retrusion of the mandible. Chin neckline is short and not well defined.
He has a head postured forward neck position. He has moderate to severe
snoring, moderate daytime somnolence, severe sleep apnea, moderate sleep
disorder as he wakes up numerous times during the night. He is
predominantly a mouth breather at nighttime and wakes up oftentimes with
a sore throat. He has a head postured forward neck position. He is on
CPAP machine and does not tolerate it well. He seems to have signs of
hypernasal speech probably as a result of the previous palatoplasty and
pillar procedures. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy. He has had a
previous UPPP procedure so the uvula is gone. Soft palate is somewhat
short. The fascial pillars are sort of moderately constricted. Tonsils
are gone. Intranasally, the turbinates, at least the part I could see in
the front appear relatively normal in size, but he has had a previous
turbinectomy performed. Septum appears reasonably straight as best as I
can see it. He does not appear to have any significant airway
obstruction at least anteriorly. With the procedures he has done, the
required pressure on the CPAP is much less than it was before the
procedures were performed, but still it is at an intolerable level for
Tom. When Tom was about 25 years old, he recalls he used to have a click
in one of his jaw joints and wore a splint and it went away. Tom is
basically a Class I cuspid-molar relationship with about a 3-mm anterior
deep bite. Since wearing his PM positioner device when he bites together
now, his front teeth hit on the inside and his back teeth do not come
together very easily. To palpation, he has no tenderness around the head
and neck area. He has Class I occlusion with a 3-mm anterior deep bite
relationship. Incisal opening is 53 mm. He has about 12 mm of excursion
movement in each direction. Joints seem to function smoothly. Tom does
have some significant spacing between the maxillary cuspids and first
bicuspids of almost 2 mm on each side. He has a Class III molar
tendency. This is likely due to his wearing of his splint.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. He has some material in his left maxillary sinus. Turbinates
appear fairly small in size. Condyles appear perhaps a little bit
arthritic.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates have essentially eliminated. He
has a septal spur on the right side back in the bony septum area. He has
a significant amount of material and sinusitis in the left sinus and
slight sinusitis with increased thickening in the mucosa in the right
sinus.

Axial view shows that the left sinus is fairly full of material. In the
right sinus, there is some thickening of the sinus membrane. Septum
appears reasonably straight and turbinates are absent in the front, but
posteriorly there is some significant turbinate yet that might be
blocking the airway, particularly on the left side.

Left TMJ sagittal tomogram show a condyle that has fairly good
morphology. Good joint space is present around the joint, and in fact
this space may be a little increased, but this could be related to his
PM positioner. Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ sagittal tomograms show some flattening on the anterior head
and on the posterior head of the condyle. The joint space likewise is
somewhat increased again probably due to wearing of the positioner.
Articular eminence is fairly steep in both joints.

Left TMJ coronal tomograms show a condyle with fairly good morphology.
The joint space is increased vertically, but slightly decreased towards
the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal tomogram shows a condyle that is a little bit broader
in width than the left side. There is some decreased joint space at the
lateral aspect of the joint. However, vertically the joint space appears
increased. There is a little bit more of a degenerative in this condyle
compared to the opposite side.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph, and this is with his head slightly
tilted upwards, shows that he has significantly decreased oropharyngeal
airway with an AP dimension of only about no more than 4 mm at the soft
palate level and at the base of the tongue, it measures about 7-8 mm. He
has a slight increased occlusal plane angle. Maxilla and mandible appear
somewhat retruded. With this head in a more normal position, the airway
might even more constricted. He has got some adenoid tissue that appears
in the oropharyngeal area. The residual turbinate can be observed at the
posterior aspect of the posterior choanae area.

We are going to refer Tom to Dr. Richard Resler, 5545 Colony Drive,
North Saginaw, Michigan 48603. Phone #517-799-5574.

Basic diagnoses for Tom would be as follows:

1.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

2.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

3.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

4.  High occlusal plane angle.

5.  Class I malocclusion.

6.  Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway.

7.  Hyperplastic soft palate.

8.  Constricture of the fascial pillars.

9.  Hypertrophied posterior aspect of the inferior turbinates.

10. Intolerance of CPAP machine.

11. Space between the maxillary cuspids and first bicuspids.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies. Retract the cuspids back against the
          first bicuspids, but leave a little bit of space between the
          upper laterals and cuspids to adjust for a slight tooth size
          discrepancy.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Try to decrease the slight
          accentuated curve of Spee in the lower arch.

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward in a
          counterclockwise direction and down graft it posteriorly
          approximately 5 mm.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible
          in a counterclockwise direction approximately 13 mm of
          pogonion.

    c.  Modified palatopharyngoplasty with the lateral flap inversion
          technique.

    d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
