RYAN VINCENT 06/01/2009

Ryan presents for evaluation. He is 20 years old. The only previous
treatment he has had is a maxillary expander device, but he has had no
orthodontic braces placed. He gets headaches about once a week at about
a level of 5 in the frontal and temporal area and upon the top area. He
rates her TMJ pain that he gets occasionally at a level of 3, but
usually does not have any pain problems. He rates his jaw function,
diet, and disability at zero. He takes no medications. He has no
earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. Right shoulder pops sometimes. He is
aware of clenching and bruxism at nighttime. Dr. Tom Pitts has made an
appliance for him to wear at nighttime.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Ryan has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is 23 mm. Upper tooth
lip relationship is about 1. The maxillary midline is about 1 mm off to
the right side and the mandibular dental midline is 1mm off to the right
side. Chin is probably 4 mm off to the right side. In profile view, he
has fairly good facial balance. There is just some slight prominence in
the mandible, but not too significant. Chin neckline and chin neck angle
are well defined. Intraorally, Ryan has all of his teeth back through
the second molars. He has some mild crowding in the lower anterior arch
and some lingual inclination. He has his second molars all the way back
in the upper arch as well. Ryan is basically a Class I cuspid-molar
relationship. He has got an anterior deep bite of about 2.5 mm.
Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. Intranasally
the septum may be deviated just slightly off to the right side.
Turbinates appear mildly enlarged. Ryan does not complain of any nasal
airway obstruction. Columella is wide and nostrils are moderately
narrow. To palpation, he has not tenderness around the head and neck
area. On opening, he has got a click in the right joint at about 15 mm
of opening and 10 mm of closing. The left joint seems to function
relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is about 46 mm and
excursion movement to the right 8 mm and the left 9 mm. He has a
transverse cant in the occlusal plane with the right side being 2 mm
shorter vertically in the cuspid area as compared to the left side.

I-CAT: Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars, but all the
rest of the teeth are present. There is some calcification between the
bicuspids on the mandibular left side. Sinuses look relatively clear. It
is difficult to evaluate the condyles in this view.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. He has got
hypertrophied turbinates. The septum is deviated off towards the right
side fairly significantly in the bone where it almost touches the
lateral nasal wall. The turbinates appear to obliterate most of the
nasal airway.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. Inferior turbinates are
quite large. Septum appears to go off towards the right side
particularly back in the bony area of the septum in close approximation
to the lateral nasal wall.

Sagittal view shows that the oropharyngeal airway looks relatively
normal. Inferior turbinates appear relatively tall vertically. The
turbinates particularly on the left side extend posterior beyond the
hard palate. The lower incisors appear to be in a little bit lingual
inclination and maxillary incisors appear to be slightly over angulated.
He appears to have a skeletal Class III jaw relationship.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that has fairly good morphology
with a little bit of superior peaking in the condyle towards the lateral
aspect of the joint. A little bit of anterior beaking, but not too
significant. Joint space appears fairly well balance.

Left TMJ sagittal view tomograms show the condyle appears a little
flattened on the posterior head. There appears to be reasonably good
joint space, but a little bit narrow anteriorly between the condyle and
articular eminence. There is a little bit of anterior beaking present in
some views, but not too significant. There is a little peaking of the
condyle towards the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ coronal views show a condyle that is quite broad and quite
arched at the superior aspect. Joint space seems a little bit narrow
particularly at the lateral aspect of the joint. Lateral rim of the
fossa curves inferiorly probably a good 4-5 mm.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle with good mediolateral width.
There is significantly decreased joint space at the lateral aspect of
the joint, although the rest of the joint space appears reasonable.
Lateral rim of the fossa curves inferiorly probably about 4 mm. In
frontal view, there appears to be just a slight vertical elongation on
the left side of the mandible compared to the right side. Chin midline
appears to be deviated just slightly towards the right side. There
appears to be just a slight cant in the occlusal plane with the right
teeth being higher than the left side.

IMPRESSION:

1.  Slight skeletal Class III jaw relationship with lingual inclination
    of the lower incisors.

2.  Decreased joint space in some aspect of both joints, particularly
    laterally in the left side as well as anteriorly and also slight
    decrease in the upper joint.

3.  Mild arthritic changes in both condyles.

4.  Septum deviated off toward the right side.

5.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

6.  Transverse cant in the occlusal plan with the left side being
    vertically shorter.

7.  Chin midline deviated a little bit off towards the right side.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  MRI of left and right TMJ.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair
          with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible
          back on the facial midline, level it transversely, and
          increase occlusal plane angle.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to increase the occlusal plane
          angle, level the arch transversely, and correct the AP
          discrepancy.

    d.  Partial turbinectomies.

    e.  Consider nasal septoplasty.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
