ADRIANA VEGA 05/29/2009

Adriana is 41 years old. Referred by Dr. Tyree, Austin, TX

Probably about at least 20 years ago, she probably began having joint
problems as her face started to get twisted and she started to get a
bigger gap between her upper and lower teeth. She had orthognathic
surgery done in approximately 1989 including both the maxilla and the
mandible. She through the years has had lots of problems with
significant headaches, but never made the correlation between joint
issues and her headaches, but in the past year her pain levels have
gotten worse. Adriana rates her headaches at a level of 8 predominantly
in the right side in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head area. She
rates her TMJ pain at 6, average daily pain at 5, jaw function at 5,
diet at 5, disability at 6. The only medications she currently take are
Yaz and amitriptyline 10-mg tablets to control bruxism and for muscle
pain.. She gets right earaches and occasional tinnitus and vertigo.
Other joints that bother her include her wrists, hands, and fingers. She
is not aware of clenching or bruxism.

Primary concerns she has include the following:

1.  Problems with her jaws.

2.  Difficulties chewing, particularly hard foods.

3.  Her teeth anterior out of place.

4.  Her bite is very bad.

5.  Pain in the right jaw.

She may have some mild snoring, but not too significant. She has
moderate daytime somnolence. She is not aware of sleep apnea issues. She
is predominantly a nasal breather at night.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, she does demonstrate a little bit
of asymmetry perhaps in the chin area. Upper lip length is about 20 mm.
Upper tooth lip relationship is zero. The maxillary midline about 1 mm
off towards the left side. The mandibular dental midline is about 2-3 mm
off to the left side. Chin is about 6 mm off towards the left side. In
profile view, she has probably about 10 mm of AP maxillary deficiency
and about 10 mm of mandibular AP deficiency. Chin neckline and chin neck
angle are not defined. Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back
through the second molars. She has some mild crowding in the lower
anterior arch, but good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all
of her teeth back through the second molars. She has moderate crowding
in the upper anterior arch. She has a Class II end-on cuspid
relationship on the left side being about 3 mm Class II. On the right
side, she is about similar to that. She has about a 2 mm anterior deep
bite. She has about a 2 mm overjet. Adriana has a transverse cant in her
occlusion with the left cuspid being about 2 mm higher than the right,
and the mandibular left cuspid 1-2 mm higher than right. Maximal incisal
opening is 40 mm. Excursion movements are 4 mm to the right, 3 mm to the
left. She can open to about 32 mm without significant pain. Adriana has
total anesthesia to her lower lip and chin area as a result of her first
surgery. To palpation, Adriana has some moderate tenderness over the
right temporalis, but milder tenderness over the retromandibular area,
TMJs, and left medial pterygoid. On jaw function, she has crepitus in
both joints.

Intranasally, the turbinates appear maybe mildly enlarged, but not too
significant. Septum appears straight. There does not appear to be any
obvious nasal airway obstruction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the presence of 2 interosseus
wires on each side of the maxilla and 1 interosseus wire on each side of
the mandibular ramus. Sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinates appear
moderate in size. Both joints look arthritic. She has a root canal in
the maxillary right central incisor. All four third molars are absent.

Coronal view shows that the sinuses appear clear. Turbinates appear
moderate in size.

Axial view shows that the sinuses are clear. The interosseus wires can
be seen. Turbinates appear relatively normal in size.

Left TMJ sagittal tomograms show some significant arthritic changes.
There has been loss of condylar volume. There is anterior beaking
present. Decreased joint space particularly towards the anterior aspect
of the joint. Superior joint space looks moderately good. Articular
eminence is moderate in inclination.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that appears arthritic. There is
anterior beaking present. There is decreased vertical joint space. There
appears to be degenerative changes in the fossa as well as in the
condyle. The articular eminence is moderately steep.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that appears quite arthritic.
There is a small pseudocyst in the head of the condyle and obvious loss
of vertical volume. There is lateral extension of the remaining lateral
pole. There is decreased vertical and particularly lateral joint space.
Joint space, however, is a little bit greater vertically on this side as
compared to the opposite side.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic and appears to
have lost some vertical volume, but not quite as severe as the opposite
side. There may be some pseudocyst in the head of the condyle. There is
significantly decreased vertical joint space and in some areas it
appears that there could be bone-on-bone contact..

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Adriana has a Class II
skeletal relationship. She has a high occlusal plane angle. The maxilla
appears slightly retruded, but the chin appears to have greater
retrusion. Oropharyngeal airway is somewhat constricted with an airway
at the soft palate level of only about 3.5 mm. At the base of the
tongue, it is about 4 mm.

Basic diagnoses for Adriana would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis.

2.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

5.  Class II end-on occlusion.

6.  Mild crowding in maxillary and mandibular arches.

7.  High occlusal plane angle.

8.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal dimension 11 mm).

9.  Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring and daytime somnolence.

10. TMJ pain.

11. Headaches.

12. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisors roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a
          counterclockwise direction using TMJ Concepts total joint
          prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    d.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
