AMY WALTERS 11/19/2008

Amy is 28 years old. Referred by Dr. David Curtis, DDS, 5866 Staples
Avenue, #201, Corpus Christi, TX 78413. Approximately about 1-1/2 years
ago, Amy became aware of having pain and problems with her jaw joints of
unknown etiology. She was seen by her dentist and then referred to Dr.
David Curtis for treatment. She has two splints that she wears since
June 2008. From June 2008 through October 2008, she had physical
therapy. This did not improve her situation. Primary concerns Amy has
are:

1.  TMJ pain.

2.  Headaches.

3.  Decreased jaw function.

4.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

Amy rates her headaches at a level of 6 that occur in the temporal areas
and behind the left eye. These headaches are continuous for her. She
rates her TMJ pain at 8, average daily pain at 7, jaw function at 7,
diet at 5, disability at 8. She gets left-sided earaches, occasional
tinnitus, but no vertigo. She is not aware of any other joints that
bother her. She is aware of clenching and bruxing at night time and also
during the day. She has difficulties concentrating during the day
because of her significant pain problems.

She takes the following medications:

1.  Ibuprofen 800 mg q.d.

2.  Soma p.r.n.

3.  Darvocet that she takes in smaller doses, but averages about 1
    tablet a day.

4.  Ortho-Tri-Cyclen.

She was placed on Trazodone, but this actually increased her headaches.
Therefore, she does not take it.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Amy has good facial symmetry and
balance. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is
about 3 to 4 mm. In profile view, Amy has good balance between the upper
lips, cheeks, and nose. She shows some AP deficiency in the chin area of
probably 6 to 8 mm. She does posture her head forward slightly.
Intraorally, Amy has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth back through the
second molars. She is fairly close to being Class I cuspid molar
relationship. She has an anterior deep bite of about 4 mm. Oropharyngeal
tissues look healthy, but her tonsils are moderately enlarged and may
block the airway somewhat. The fascial pillars consequently are somewhat
constricted as well. The turbinates appear moderately enlarged. The
septum is within reasonable shape. She could have some mild to moderate
nasal airway problems. To palpation, Amy has moderate pain over the TMJs
and milder pain over the masseters, medial pterygoids, and
retromandibular area. Maximal incisal opening is 23 mm and she can open
to about 18 without significant pain. Excursion movement to the right 3
mm, to the left 2 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars, but the rest of the teeth are all present. Sinuses look
relatively clear. Both condyles appear quite arthritic with progressive
degenerative changes.

Waters view shows that the nasal septum is fairly straight and
turbinates are just moderate in size with perhaps a little bit of
obstruction on the right side. The sinuses appear relatively clear.

Left TMJ tomogram is taken with the mandible postured forward in an
edge-to-edge incisor relationship, thus, there is an increased posterior
joint space. The articular eminence is moderately steep.

On the right side, she likewise has it postured forward in end-to-end
incisor relationship with posterior open bites so there is an increased
posterior joint space. In centric relation, she has a good occlusal fit
into a Class I position, thus these x-rays we will retake to get a
better imaging. On opening, there is very minimal translation of the
condyles with significant bilateral restricted opening.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph is also taken with a postured forward
end-on incisor relationship and posterior open bites. It appears she may
have decreased oropharyngeal airway posteriorly. She has a moderately
high occlusal plane angle. Facial morphology with some slight anterior
vertical maxillary excess and also AP deficient.

Basic diagnoses for Amy would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ severe reactive arthritis.

2.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

3.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway.

6.  Headaches.

7.  Severe TMJ pain.

8.  Myofascial pain.

9.  Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring and daytime somnolence.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
          Concept total joint prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    c.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

    d.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction.

4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
