VICTORIA LEIGH WARD 11/26/2008

Leigh is 26 years old. Referred by Dr. Scott Bolding, Springdale,
Arkansas. Leigh has had previous surgery to include rhinoplasty,
bilateral TMJ, eye surgery, and wisdom teeth removed. Leigh’s TMJ
problems began she believes when she was about 22 years of age and on
July 7, 2004, when she had her third molars removed. She says she has
not been out of pain since that time. She has been treated since then
and had an NTI splint from 2004 to 2005. She has been in a different
kind of splint since 2006 until the present time. She has been under
orthodontic treatment since November 2007 until the present. She has
surgery for bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning with Mitek
anchors in May 2007. Other treatments she has had include physical
therapy for 3 months in 2005 and use of a Therabite. She received Botox
injections in June and October 2008. She currently is under acupuncture
and massage therapy.

Leigh currently takes the following medications:

1.  Hydrocodone 10/325 six tablets per day.

2.  Dilaudid 2 mg about 5 times a week for severe breakthrough pain.

3.  Microgestin (BCP).

4.  Amitriptyline 25 mg q.h.s.

Leigh gets TMJ pain at about a level of 8 and average daily pain at 8.
She rates her jaw function at 7, diet at 6, disability at 6. She does
not have any problems with headaches. She gets occasional right-sided
earaches, but no tinnitus, vertigo, or hearing loss. No other joints
bother her. She is aware of clenching at night time. Primary concerns
that Leigh has include the following:

1.  Severe TMJ pain for the past 4 years.

2.  Face swells as her joints become more inflamed.

3.  Teeth significantly out of occlusion with progressive worsening of
    her bite.

4.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

She has been diagnosed as having other conditions including the
following:

1.  Depression.

2.  Anxiety.

3.  Fibromyalgia.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Leigh has reasonably good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is almost 20 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is 6 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on
the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline is shifted to the left
about almost 2 mm. The mandibular dental midline and chin are pretty
much aligned with each other, so the chin is also about 2 mm off to the
left side. In profile view, Leigh demonstrates significant lip
incompetence of about 7 to 8 mm. Chin appears retruded by probably 4 to
5 mm. Chin neckline is just slightly shorter, although the chin neck
angle is reasonably well defined. AP projection of the maxilla appears
fairly good. Intraorally, Leigh has all of her lower teeth back through
the second molars present. She has appliances from first bicuspid to
first bicuspid. Her teeth appear fairly well aligned, although there are
some minor rotations and a little bit crowding in the lower anterior
arch. She has good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, she has all of
her teeth back through the second molars. She has braces from second
molar to second molar and bands around the first molars. When Leigh
bites down, she occludes only on right first molars and all of the rest
of the teeth are out of occlusion. She has a significant open bite on
the left side of probably almost 3 to 4 mm in the bicuspid area and at
least 1 mm in the molar area. She has about a zero vertical overbite
anteriorly. She has an end-on Class II occlusion, being slightly worse
on the left side than the right side. Oropharyngeal tissues look healthy
and normal. To palpation, she has some moderate tenderness over the
masseter muscles, TMJs, retromandibular area and the left medial
pterygoid. Maximal opening is 37 mm, but only about 25 mm without
significant pain. Excursion movement to the right 4 mm with pain and to
the left side about 3 mm. Joints seem to function relatively smoothly.
She does have a history of being around parakeets, and she has had three
of them prior to the onset of her TMJ problems. All three parakeets
died. It is quite possible that she has a reactive arthritis that could
possibly be related to Chlamydia psittaci or other bacterial or viral
problem.

Based on clinical, radiographic, dental model, and MRI analyses, her
diagnoses are as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ reactive arthritis.

2.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

3.  Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.

4.  Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.

5.  Slight Class III occlusion particularly on the left side.

6.  Posterior crossbites.

7.  Occluding only on the right first molars with all other teeth being
    out of occlusion.

8.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway of about 4 mm (normal dimension 11
    mm).

9.  Severe TMJ pain.

10. Myofascial pain.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch. Be sure lateral
          incisor roots are tipped mesially and cuspid roots tipped
          distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the
          lower anterior teeth removing no more than 2 mm and retract.

2.  Evaluation at the Environmental Center at Dallas to test for
    hypersensitivity to the materials in the total joint prostheses.

3.  CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).

4.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
          Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move the anterior aspect
          superiorly and expand the posterior aspect.

    c.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

5. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
