CATHERINE WALSH 10/19/2009

Catherine is 48 years old. She was referred by Dr. James Dean Jensen,
5800 Coit Road, Suite 500, Plano, TX 75023

Catherine’s joint problems began to the best of her knowledge when she
was about 28 years old in 1989. She developed TMJ problems and this
began about 20 years ago. About 3 or 4 years ago, she developed
significant problems in her joints and she became aware that her lower
jaw became more retruded.

Primary concerns that Catherine has at this time include the following:

1.  TMJ problems.

2.  Open bite.

3.  Destroying her back teeth and crowns since only her back teeth
    touch.

4.  Her smile has changed significantly.

5.  Jaw joint deterioration.

6.  Jaw bone deterioration.

7.  Difficulties eating and chewing.

8.  Headaches.

9.  Jaw pain.

10. Adverse changes in her speech.

Catherine’s joint problems began when she was 20 years old in 1989. The
etiology is unknown. She hit her chin on a see-saw cutting it open and
requiring stitches at about age 14. She hit her head on the diving board
when she was on diving team at age 17. The treatment she has had to date
began about 20 years ago when she was treated by Dr. Jesse Taylor with
splint therapy, diet modification, and medications. She did fairly well
on that routine and then about 4 years her problems became worse. She
saw Dr. Rick Riggs who revised the previous splint that she had. She
also has received physical therapy, massage therapy, and chiropractic
treatment. She gets massage therapy almost weekly now to try to maintain
her pain.

Catherine takes the following medications:

1.  Mobic p.r.n.

2.  Claritin p.r.n.

3.  Aleve p.r.n.

4.  Sudafed p.r.n.

5.  Midrin p.r.n.

6.  Iron supplement occasionally.

She has no earaches, but occasional tinnitus and vertigo. Other joints
that bother her include her knees, ankles, and finger. She has been told
she has a mild autoimmune disorder, but is not sure what it is. She also
has problems with anemia. She is aware of clenching at nighttime and may
also do this in the daytime. Her speech has been affected and her smile
has changed significantly as well.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Catherine has good left-to-right
facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is 1 mm. She has just slight increased fullness in the
right masseter area compared to the left side. Maxillary midline is
pretty much on the facial midline as is the mandibular midline and chin.
The nasal tip is just slightly to the right side 1-2 mm. In profile,
Catherine demonstrates some AP maxillary deficiency of probably 4-5 mm.
The mandible is retruded about 18 mm. The chin neckline is not defined.
She has some lip incompetence of about 5-6 mm. Intraorally, Catherine
has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars. It appears
she has crowns on most of the posterior teeth from the bicuspids on
posteriorly. She has some mild moderate crowding in the lower anterior
arch. She appears to have adequate attached gingiva. In the upper arch,
she has all of her teeth back to the second molars. She has crowns it
appears on her left molars. She occludes only on the right second molars
with all other teeth out of occlusion. She has an anterior open bite of
4-5 mm. Oropharyngeal tissues all look relatively normal. Intranasally,
right turbinate is mildly enlarged, the left one is relatively normal.
Septum appears reasonably straight. There does not appear to be any
major nasal airway obstruction. To palpation, Catherine has some mild
discomfort over the TMJs and retromandibular area. Joints seem to
function relatively smoothly. Maximal incisal opening is 40 mm and
opening without discomfort about 30 mm. Excursion movements are 6 mm in
each direction.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. The rest of the teeth are present. She has root canals on the
mandibular first molars and right lateral incisor. She has enlarged
turbinates. Sinuses look reasonably clear.

Axial view shows that the turbinates are quite large. Sinuses are clear.
Septum appears reasonably straight in this view.

Coronal view shows that the turbinates are excessively large and appear
to block most of the nasal airway. Sinuses are clear except for a little
bit of increased thickening of the sinus membranes in the left floor of
the sinus. Septum is deviated in the bony area off towards the left side
contributing to some airway obstruction there.

Left TMJ tomogram shows severe arthritis and loss of volume of the
condyle where most of the head of the condyle appears to have resorbed
away. Articular eminence is moderately steep. There appears to be
increased joint space and she likely was not in the centric relation
when the x-ray was taken.

Right TMJ lateral tomogram shows a condyle with severe arthritis,
although there is some residual condylar head at the left compared to
the opposite side. There is anterior beaking present. Articular eminence
appears a little bit more shallow on this side than the opposite, but
not by much.

Left TMJ coronal view shows severe arthritic changes of the condyle with
it appears almost like a sickle shape. Lateral rim of the fossa curves
inferiorly probably 4 mm or so. There is severe destruction of the
condylar head on this side.

Right TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that has significantly more
volume than the opposite side, although still there is evidence of
significant condylar resorption. There is significantly decreased
lateral joint space where it appears that there could be almost
bone-on-bone contact. There are erosions on the head of the condyle
present.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Catherine has a retruded
maxilla and mandible with a significantly high occlusal plane angle.
Oropharyngeal airway measures about 3.5 mm at the base of the tongue and
perhaps 3.5-4 mm at the soft palate level.

Basic diagnoses for Catherine would be as follows:

1.  Connective tissue autoimmune disease.

2.  Bilateral TMJ severe condylar resorption.

3.  Mandibular AP hypoplasia.

4.  Maxillary AP, posterior vertical, and transverse hypoplasia.

5.  Anterior open bite of 4-5 mm.

6.  Class II end-on occlusion.

7.  Occluding only on the mandibular right second molar.

8.  Headaches.

9.  TMJ pain.

10. Hypertrophied turbinates.

11. Nasal airway obstruction.

12. Significantly decreased oropharyngeal airway of an AP dimension of 3
    mm (normal 11 mm).

13. Sleep apnea symptoms.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
          mesially and cuspid root distally to make room for interdental
          osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

    c.  Place brackets or bands on all second molars, but do not engage
          the second molars in the arch wire at this time. Stop the arch
          wire at the first molars.

2.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement in a
          counterclockwise direction, advancing the chin point 18 mm,
          using TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla in a
          counterclockwise direction approximately 6 mm at the incisal
          edge and down grafting it posteriorly about 6 mm.

    c.  Bilateral coronoidotomies.

    d.  Bilateral partial inferior turbinectomies.

    e.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

4.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

5.  Restorative dentistry if indicated to complete the occlusion.
