KAREN VOLCHOK 02/02/2009

Karen is 52 years old, referred by Alison Sibley, MD, 3434 Swiss Avenue,
Suite 100, Dallas, Texas 75246. Karen was diagnosed with Hodgkin’s
lymphoma in March 2003. She has had chemotherapy and radiation therapy
and everything is under control at this time. She had a hysterectomy in
1994 and has had two foot surgeries in 1992 and then in 2005.

Karen’s TMJ problems began when she was about 21 years old in 1978. In
1979, she had surgery for the TMJ problems, but this included a LeForte
I maxillary osteotomy and what appeared to be bilateral vertical oblique
osteotomies in the mandible. This did resolve her situation. She did
well until about 9 months ago when she began developing problems again.
Her primary concerns at this time are as follows:

1.  Pain and discomfort in the jaws and jaw joints.

2.  Feels as though the lower jaw is jutting forward.

3.  Bites only on two rear teeth.

4.  Feels pressure and discomfort at the joints bilaterally.

Previous treatment also included orthodontics done around 1979 for the
surgery. Currently, she is wearing some whitening trays on her teeth and
this helps reduce her headache and pain problems. She was given a
retainer, or possibly it might have been a bite splint of some type, but
she only used it one time because it caused her significant pain in her
jaws and increased headaches.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Karen has fairly good facial
symmetry in the middle and upper third face. Upper lip length is about
24 mm. Upper tooth lip relationship is about zero. The maxillary midline
is pretty much on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline may
be just slightly to the right. The chin appears to be probably about 3
to 4 mm to the right. In profile view, she has fairly good facial
balance. The chin may be just slightly AP deficient by maybe 4 mm or so,
but otherwise she has good facial balance. Chin neckline is reasonable
in length, although the chin neck angle is not real clearly defined.
Intraorally, she is missing mandibular probably first bicuspids.
Posterior teeth appear to be in significant lingual inclination. She has
some mild crowding of the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she is
also missing probably the first bicuspids. She has all of her teeth in
both arches back through the third molars. She has basically a Class I
cuspid-molar relationship. She has about a 1 mm vertical overbite
relationship. Oropharyngeal tissues looks healthy. She does have a
hyperplastic uvula which may account for some of her snoring. Otherwise,
the soft palate looks relatively normal in length and there appears to
be space between it and the posterior pharyngeal wall. Intranasally, the
turbinates appear quite large. The septum, at least the part I can see,
appears reasonably straight. She is aware of clenching at nighttime, at
least she has been told she does that by the dentist, but she does not
believe she does that during the day. Her headaches she gets are
inconsistent and at about a level of 6 in the frontal and temporal area
and on the top of the head. She may get headaches every day for 4 or 5
days and then may go for a time without getting any. She does rate her
headaches at about a level 6 on the frontal, temporal, and up on top of
the head. TMJ pain is at 4, average daily pain at 3, jaw function at 2,
diet at 0, disability at 2. She basically takes vitamins and Estroven.
To palpation, she has some very mild tenderness over the TMJs and
retromandibular area. Karen does wear whitening trays on her teeth. It
is likely these whitening trays cause excessive pressure on the
posterior molar teeth and may make them a little bit sensitive if she is
clenching at night. This may be why she has the feeling that those teeth
hit first. Her symptoms are quite mild, and she may be able to be
managed and treated conservatively.

Basic diagnoses would be as follows:

1.  Left TMJ arthritis and anteriorly displaced articular disc with
    questionable reduction.

2.  Right TMJ arthritis and medial displacement of the articular disc.

3.  Headaches.

4.  Bilateral TMJ discomfort.

5.  Hypertrophied turbinates.

6.  Hypertrophied uvula.

I recommend the following treatment:

1.  Discontinue splints.

2.  Medication: Klonopin 1 mg q.h.s. May decrease to 0.5 mg if this
    works well. If medication resolves the TMJ jaw issues, then the
    patient may be able to control her situation well with periodic use
    of Klonopin. I gave her a prescription for Klonopin 1-mg tablets,
    dispensing 30 tablets, 1 tablet q.h.s., refill x5.
