AMELIA WHITAKER 12/08/2008

Amelia is 13 years 10-1/2 months of age. Her father is Dr. Bryan
Whitaker, an endodontist and oral pathologist. Amelia has had a history
of asthma that was significant in the past, but today is not such a
major problem for her. She had her third molars removed in 2007. She
takes the following medications:

1.  Zyrtec p.r.n.

2.  Albuterol, but less than once per month.

Amelia is referred by Dr. Richard Roblee, 1915 North Green Acres Road,
Fayetteville, Arkansas 72703.

Amelia has a familial history of mandibular prognathism. Her mother had
the same situation, and she has a sister who has the same kind of
problem. Her sister is 19 years of age. Amelia’s father also has a Class
III jaw relationship. It is not known if the grandparents or
great-grandparents had a similar kind of situation. She does have three
cousins who are unaffected.

Amelia has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, and myofascial pain.
She rates her jaw function at 1, diet at 0, and disability at 0. She
gets occasional tinnitus, but no problems with earaches, vertigo, or
hearing loss. No other joints bother her. She is not aware of clenching
or bruxism.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Amelia has some increased width
in the nasal structures. Upper lip length is 20 mm. Upper tooth lip
relationship is about 2 mm. The maxillary midline is pretty much on the
facial midline. The nasal tip is just slightly off to the right side
about 2 mm. The mandibular dental midline is off to the right side about
3 mm. The mandibular dental midline and chin midline are fairly well
aligned with each other. Amelia has an anterior open bite of about 1 mm.
Intraorally, Amelia has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. The teeth are nicely aligned and leveled. She seems to have
adequate attached gingiva. The gingiva appears a little bit inflamed. In
the upper arch, Amelia has all of her lower teeth back through the
second molars. The teeth also appear to be nicely aligned and leveled.
She might have a slight increased curve of Spee in the upper arch. She
has a slight increased curve of Wilson in the upper arch. Amelia has a
slight Class III cuspid relationship on the right side by about 2 mm and
on the left side she is about almost 5 to 6 mm Class III. She has small
upper lateral incisors particularly on the left side indicative of a
tooth size discrepancy. She has an anterior crossbite and a left-sided
posterior crossbite extending from the central incisors back to about
the second bicuspid. She has an upper lip incompetence of about 5 mm.
Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Fascial pillars may be
mildly constricted. Tonsils look relatively normal. Intranasally, the
columella is quite wide and nostrils are moderately narrow, but not too
significant. Intranasally, the left turbinate is quite large and
obstructive. The right turbinate is more normal in size and does not
appear to create any obstruction. The septum appears reasonably
straight. Right TMJ seems to function reasonably smoothly. In the left
TMJ, she has an opening click at about 40 mm. On excursion, she actually
has an audible click in the left TMJ as she shifts towards the right
side. Amelia has no sleep apnea symptoms. In profile, the maxilla
appears to be retruded maybe about 2 mm, and the mandible and the chin
are actually retruded by about 5 to 6 mm. Chin neckline is shorter,
although the chin neck angle is fairly well defined.

Basic diagnoses for Amelia would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia, left side worse than the
    right side.

2.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

3.  Deviated mandibular prognathism.

4.  Left TMJ articular disc dislocation with late reduction and
    questionable position of the right articular disc.

5.  Class III occlusion, being worse on the left side as compared to the
    right side.

6.  Anterior and right side cross bite.

7.  Probable tooth size discrepancy (no models were available at the
    time of evaluation).

8.  Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch.

9.  Accentuated curve of Wilson in the upper arch.

10. Left nasal hypertrophic turbinate.

11. External nasal deformity.

12. Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 4 mm (normal airway dimension 11
    mm).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  MRI of left and right TMJs.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Continue to align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Continue to align and level mandibular arch. Slenderize the
          lower anterior teeth removing about 2 mm of tooth structure to
          correct for the tooth size discrepancy and to decrease the
          angulation of the lower incisors.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc
          repositioning with Mitek anchors.

    b.  Multiple mandibular ramus osteotomies to shift the mandible back
          on the facial midline and counterclockwise rotate it slightly.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it slightly, upright
          the maxillary incisors, and correct any transverse
          discrepancies that may be present.

    d.  Left nasal turbinectomy.

    e.  External rhinoplasty.

4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
