BARBARA YODER 11/03/2008

Barbara is 47 years old, referred by Dr. David Reed, 4109 N. 22nd
Street, McAllen, TX 78501. Barbara’s TMJ problems began when she was
about 15 years of age when she was having orthodontics done. She became
aware of her jaw joints clicking and popping. She had orthodontics at
the age of 15 and then again at the age of 35. She has also had dental
equilibrations performed. She has worn splints for many years. Primary
concerns that she has are as follows:

1.  Developing close lock.

2.  It is very uncomfortable for her to actually bite her teeth
    together.

3.  She has to posture her mandible forward disoccluding her posterior
    teeth to be reasonably comfortable.

Barbara does not have any real significant pain in the TMJ area and
rates it at a level of 1. Her headaches are about a level of 1. She
rates her average daily pain, however, at a level of 3. She rtes her jaw
function at 9, diet at 8, and she rates her disability at 5. She is
aware of clenching and bruxing her teeth at night time. She has no
trouble with earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo. No other joints bother her
at this time. She takes Lexapro and Boniva as far as medications are
concerned.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Barbara has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 22 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is about 3 mm. The maxillary midline is fairly
close to being on the facial midline. The mandibular dental midline may
be just about 1 mm off to the right side, but chin is pretty much on the
facial midline. In profile view, Barbara has fairly good facial balance.
There may be just some slight AP deficiency, but not too significant.
Chin may be retruded about 3 to 4 mm. Intraorally, Barbara has all of
her lower teeth back through the second molars. There is some mild
crowding of the lower anterior arch. In the upper arch, she has all of
her teeth back through the second molars present. She is fairly close to
being Class I cuspid-molar relationship. In reevaluation, Barbara is
actually missing the mandibular right central incisor that was taken out
for orthodontic reasons because of crowding. She otherwise has a Class I
cuspid-molar relationship and probably about a 3 to 4 mm deep bite. To
palpation, Barbara has no tenderness around the head and neck area.
Incisal opening is 49 mm. Excursion movements are about 7 mm in each
direction. She has significant crepitation on both joints, being greater
on the right side than the left side.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. The rest of the teeth are all present except for the mandibular
right central incisor. The right condyle looks sclerotic and appears to
have anterior beaking. A little hard to evaluate the left joint.

Waters view shows that the sinuses appear relatively clear. Turbinate on
the left side might be somewhat enlarged. Bony septum appears relatively
straight.

Left TMJ tomogram shows the joint appears somewhat arthritic. There is
decreased superior and posterior joint space. Articular eminence has a
moderate inclination. Open views show restricted translation in both
joints.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is arthritic with anterior
beaking. There is significantly decreased vertical and posterior joint
space. Articular eminence is moderately inclined.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a slight skeletal
Class II relationship. She has a deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm and an
overjet of probably 1 to 2 mm. Oropharyngeal airway is 5 mm at the soft
palate level and about 7 mm at the base of the tongue.

Barbara’s mother-in-law died from an MRSA infection. Barbara recently
has had an MRSA infection associated with her nose that she is on
medication for currently. We may need to use a different antibiotic than
usual to be sure that she does not have a flare-up with that
postsurgery.

On review with Barbara, she states that she is tired during the day and
at least 3 days during the week she has to take a nap. She does have
significant snoring as well. She is not sure if she wakes up at night
unable to catch her breath, but will check with her husband.

Based on clinical, radiographic, and MRI evaluation, Barbara’s diagnoses
are as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ severe arthritis with degenerated discs and
    perforations with bone-on-bone function.

2.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

5.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 5 mm (normal 11 mm).

6.  Mildly hyperplastic soft palate.

7.  Missing mandibular right central incisor previously removed for
    orthodontic reasons.

8.  Anterior deep bite of about 3 to 4 mm.

9.  Sleep apnea symptoms including snoring and daytime somnolence.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

Treatment option 1:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

2.  CT scan (TMJ Concepts protocol).

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
          Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla forward.

    d.  Possible bilateral coronoidotomies.

    e.  UPPP procedure.

4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.

Treatment option 2:

1.  CT scan of jaw and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

2.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
          Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

    c.  Application of maxillary and mandibular arch bars.

    d.  UPPP.
