TING AN ZHENG 11/04/2008

Ting An is 17 years old. She had previous orthodontics beginning in June
2003 and the braces were removed in February 2006. This past summer was
the first that she really noted that her teeth and jaws were not aligned
properly and that the lower jaw was out in front of the upper jaw.
Interestingly, her great-great-grandmother, her great-grandmother, and
aunts all have mandibular prognathism. Ting An has no problems with TMJ
pain, headaches, myofascial pain. No earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.
The other joints that bother her include her lower back, and she has
extra bone growth in her foot that bothers her at times. She is not
aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Ting An has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 19 mm. Upper
tooth lip relationship is 5 mm. The maxillary midline is just slightly
off to the right side about 1 mm as is the mandibular dental midline and
chin is probably 2 mm off to the right side. In profile view, she
demonstrates probably about 6 mm of lip incompetence. She may have just
some slight AP deficiency in the maxilla, but not too much. The lower
third face appears long and chin appears a little bit strong. Chin
neckline looks fairly normal in length and chin neckline is well
defined. She has a high mandibular plane facial type morphology.
Intraorally, Ting An has all of her lower teeth back through the second
molars. The teeth appear nicely aligned and level. The right cuspid
seems to be maybe 1 mm or 2 behind the left cuspid. In the upper arch,
Ting An has all of her teeth back through the second molars. The right
cuspid may be 1 mm posterior to the left cuspid. Ting An has an anterior
crossbite, bilateral posterior crossbites, and a Class III occlusion
that measures about 4 or 5 mm. She has an end-on incisor relationship.
She has a fracture of her maxillary left central incisor in the mesial
cuspid tip. Oropharyngeal tissues looks relatively normal. Posterior
facial pillar is positioned fairly far posterior compared to the
anterior pillar. Tonsils are present and may be mildly enlarged.
Intranasally, the turbinates appear relatively normal in size. At the
base of the septum on the right side, she has a little bit of a spur
extending in towards the right side of the nose, but does not appear to
be large enough to be causing any significant obstruction. To palpation,
she has no tenderness around the head and neck area. Joints function
smoothly. Incisal opening is 57 mm. Excursion movement to the right 6
mm, to the left 7 mm.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of the maxillary
third molars, but the presence of mandibular third molars that are in
mesial inclination and impacted. The rest of the teeth are all present.
The sinuses look relatively clear. Condylar head and necks appear
somewhat elongated.

Waters view shows that the bony septum is reasonably straight. The left
turbinate appears to obliterate a good part of the nasal airway. The
right side appears to have a passable airway. Sinuses look relatively
clear.

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that are elongated.
Articular eminence is relatively shallow. Joint space appears thin and
narrow.

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head and neck that are elongated,
and the articular eminence is moderately shallow. There is decreased
superior joint space, but it could be just that the articular discs are
extremely thin. There is some restriction in translation in both joints.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Ting An has what appears to
be a skeletal Class III relationship, but she has a relatively high
occlusal plane angle. Upper incisors are somewhat over angulated, and
she has anterior vertical maxillary excess. Oropharyngeal airway looks
very good dimension wise.

Basic diagnoses for Ting An would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia.

2.  Mandibular prognathism.

3.  Anterior mandibular vertical hyperplasia.

4.  Anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia.

5.  Transverse maxillary hypoplasia.

6.  Class III end-on occlusion.

7.  Anterior and bilateral posterior crossbites.

8.  Impacted mandibular third molars x2.

9.  Left nasal hypertrophied turbinate.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip lateral incisor roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch. Try to tip the first and second
          molars lingually slightly to decrease the relatively flat
          curve of Wilson.

2.  Monitor facial growth and development to confirm the presence or
    absence of active condylar hyperplasia.

3.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ high condylectomy and articular disc repositioning
          and ligament repair with Mitek anchor if condylar hyperplasia
          is confirmed.

    b.  Multiple mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible
          posteriorly and rotate it superiorly.

    c.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to move it superiorly
          approximately 3 mm and expand it approximately 8 mm.

    d.  Anterior mandibular horizontal ostectomy.

    e.  Left nasal partial turbinectomy.

    f.  Surgical removal of impacted third molars x2.

4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
