DENEEN WHITE 01/28/2009

Deneen is 55 years old, referred by Dr. Roy R. Jolley, DDS, 5 Van
Circle, Little Rock, Arkansas 72207. Deneen TMJ’s problems began in
April or May of 2008. Within the year prior to that, she had had thyroid
surgery and also gallbladder surgery. It was about 5 months after the
thyroid surgery that she began developing clicking and popping in the
jaw joints. At first it did not bother her a whole bunch, but then she
began developing pain and headaches with it. In August 2008, her first
splint was made and she is now on her second splint. In August 2008, she
also started chiropractic treatment and had approximately 20 treatments.
In October 2008, she began massage therapy and does that now about once
a week and finds that more beneficial than the chiropractic treatment.

Deneen rates her headaches in the frontal, temporal, and posterior head
area at about a level of 6. TMJ pain is at 6, average daily pain at 4,
jaw function and diet at 7, disability at 4. She gets occasional
earaches, frequent tinnitus, but no vertigo or hearing loss. Other
joints that bother her include her knees, ankles, fingers, and her neck.
Radiographically, she has compressed vertebrae at approximately C4-C5.
She had thyroid disease for which she had a total thyroidectomy and in
the process her recurrent laryngeal nerve was damaged on the left side.
She also has had gallbladder surgery performed within the past year. She
is aware of clenching her teeth at night time and also during the day
time. She has been tested for rheumatoid arthritis and these results are
negative.

She currently takes the following medications:

1.  Synthroid 100 mcg q.d.

2.  Lexapro 10 mg q.d.

3.  Klonopin 0.5 mg 1 to 2 q.h.s.

4.  Flexeril 10 mg q.h.s.

5.  Glucosamine 3 per day.

6.  Omega 3 2000 mg q.d.

7.  CQ-10 (vitamin).

8.  Calcium 1500 mg with vitamin D 1000 mg.

Primary concerns that Deneen has include the following:

1.  Constant pain in her jaws and neck.

2.  Unable to chew her food and raw vegetables.

3.  Decreased jaw opening.

4.  Headaches.

5.  Snoring.

6.  Moderate daytime tiredness.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION. In frontal view, Deneen has fairly good
left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 20. Upper tooth
lip relationship is about zero. The maxillary midline is just slightly
to the left about 1 mm. The mandibular dental midline and chin are
closer to being on the facial midline. In profile view, Deneen has some
slight AP maxillary deficiency of about 3 to 4 mm and AP deficiency in
the mandible of about 8 to 10 mm. Chin neckline is short and chin neck
angle is not real well defined. Intraorally, Deneen has all of her lower
teeth through the second molars. She has some moderate crowding of the
lower anterior arch. There is some hyper-eruption of the cuspid and the
anterior teeth. In the upper arch, she has all of her teeth. She has an
anterior deep bite of probably about 3 mm. She has bilateral posterior
open bites in part related to the splint therapy that she is having. She
is basically a Class I cuspid on the left side and slight Class II on
the right side by probably 2 mm. Posterior open bites are about 2 on the
left side and 3 on the right side. With the splint in place, the splint
covers only the bicuspids and molars and leaves the cuspids and incisors
out of occlusion. Oropharyngeal tissues appear reasonably healthy. Soft
palate may be slightly elongated. Intranasally, the septum is deviated a
little off towards to the left side, but the left turbinate appears
relatively normal to small in size. Right turbinate appears moderate in
size, but it appears that there is a passable airway. To palpation, she
has mild tenderness throughout most of the head and neck area. Joints
are not particularly uncomfortable to palpation. She has fairly constant
pain in the jaw joint, particularly with any type of jaw function.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION. Panorex shows the absence of all four third
molars. The first molars in the lower arch have crowns on them. She has
a root canal on the mandibular left lateral incisor. Sinuses appear
relatively clear. Right turbinate appears enlarged. The condyles appear
arthritic with flattening on the anterior heads. The left condyle
appears slightly smaller than the right side. Articular eminences are
moderately steep.

Left TMJ sagittal views show some anterior beaking in the left condyle
and some significant flattening on the posterior head of the condyle.
There is significant anterior beaking particularly towards the medial
side. The lateral side of the condyle has a little bit better
morphology. Articular eminence is quite steep. The condyle appears to be
posteriorly displaced in the fossa with an increased anterior joint
space.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows condyle that has a greater amount of bone
change on the posterior head of the condyle. The condyle has a hockey
stick shape to it, particularly towards the medial aspect of the joint.
It appears there may be some erosions on the cortical head of the
condyle, particularly at the lateral margin. The condyle has an unusual
shape to it in the mid-part of the condylar head. The condyle actually
appears postured forward in the fossa with increased vertical and
posterior joint space.

Left TMJ coronal view shows a condyle that is arthritic and actually has
erosive changes in the condylar head. There appears to be decreased
joint space at the lateral pole of the condyle. The vertical joint space
appears decreased at the lateral aspect of the joint.

Right TMJ shows the there appears to be a little bit of erosion in the
head of the condyle, particularly adjacent to the lateral rim of the
fossa. There is decreased joint space in this area, but good joint space
vertically at the medial half of the condyle.

Axial view show that the right turbinate is quite large and may
obliterate part of the nasal airway. Sinuses look relatively clear.
Coronal view shows that there is deviation of the bony nasal septum with
a septal spur extending off towards the left side that may be causing
significant obstruction of the airway on that side. Turbinate on the
right side is quite large and it appears it could be causing some
significant nasal airway problems. Sinuses are clear involving both the
maxillary and ethmoid sinuses.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there a mild AP maxillary
and mandibular deficiency. The oropharyngeal airway is somewhat
decreased particularly at the soft palate level. She appears to have a
moderately high occlusal plane angle and she has posterior open bites.
Deneen has no significant tooth size discrepancy.

The basic diagnoses would be as follows:

1.  Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without
    reduction on the left side but with reduction on the right side.

2.  AP maxillary hypoplasia.

3.  Posterior vertical maxillary hypoplasia.

4.  AP mandibular hypoplasia.

5.  Decreased oropharyngeal airway of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).

6.  Bilateral posterior open bites.

7.  Crowding in the lower anterior arch.

8.  TMJ pain.

9.  Headaches.

10. Myofascial pain.

11. Polyarthropathy with numerous other joints involved including the
    neck, knees, ankles, wrists, fingers, etc.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

1.  Sleep study to evaluate for sleep apnea.

2.  Presurgical orthodontics.

    a.  Align and level maxillary arch. Tip the lateral incisor roots
          mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for
          interdental osteotomies.

    b.  Align and level mandibular arch.

3.  CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).

4.  Surgery.

    a.  Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ
          Concepts total joint prostheses.

    b.  Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla and down
          graft it posteriorly to decrease the occlusal plane angle.

    c.  Bilateral mandibular coronoidotomies to maintain function of the
          temporalis muscle.

    d.  Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).

5.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
