B536

B536 is 59 years old.  Referred by X, X. He is in pretty good health.  He smokes 2 packs of cigarettes per day and has done this for 25 years.  He has borderline hypertension, but he is not medicated at this time.  B536 has fairly good facial balance and symmetry and in profile has good balance.  He has had all of his upper teeth taken out and all of his lower teeth except for the anterior six teeth.  His maximum opening is only 12 mm from his lower incisor tips to his maxillary gums.  He can close down until his lower teeth overlap his upper gums, but the opening is extremely and severely limited.  He has about 12 mm of incisal opening, but zero movement to the right side and maybe 2 to 3 mm to the left side.  To palpation, he has no pain around the head and neck area.  He does appear to have some bony deposition and heterotopic bone over the left TMJ area.  As he goes into excursal kind of movements, he has a little bit of crepitus in the left TMJ.  Intranasally, septum may be deviated a little bit off towards the right side and the turbinates are moderately enlarged.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal. Uvula, however, is moderately elongated and may be partly responsible for his snoring situation. 

Primary concerns that B536 has includes the following:

    1. Left jaw joint is severely limited and function. 
    2. Unable to get dentures because of the severely decreased jaw opening. 

Basic diagnoses for B536 would be as follows:    

    1. Left TMJ bony ankylosis. 
    2. Severe limited jaw function with maximum opening of only 12 mm.
    3. Totally edentulous in the maxilla and missing all the lower teeth except for the anterior six teeth.
    4. Severe difficulties chewing.

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

    1. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).  
    2. Surgery.
        a. Left TMJ removal of heterotopic bone mass, low condylectomy, and debridement of the joint. 
        b. Left TMJ reconstruction with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
        c. Left TMJ fat graft (harvest from the abdomen).
    3. Consideration of osteointegrated implants to the maxilla and posterior mandible.
    4. Prosthetic dentistry to construct maxillary dentures and mandibular partial denture. 
