RACHEL HILL 									06/27/2008 

Rachel has seen the following doctors:  Dr. Hilton Goldreich, Dr. Hilton Isrealson, Dr. Perry Goldberg.  Her dentist is Dr. Robert Morgan.  Rachel has been diagnosed with ectodermal dysplasia.  Her concerns are:

    1. Missing teeth.
    2. Jaw bone problems.
    3. Headaches.

Rachel gets headaches at about a level of 3 that she relates as being on top of her head and towards the front top as well.  She gets headaches 2 times a week at about a level of 3.  She has no TMJ or myofascial pain symptoms that she is aware of.  She rates her jaw function, diet, and disability at 0.  She takes no medications.  No joints bother her.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She has no airway problems.  

CLINICAL EVALUATION:  In frontal view,  Rachel has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 0 to -2 mm. The nasal tip is off to the right side just slightly about 2 mm.  The maxillary dental midline is pretty on the facial midline.  Mandibular dental midline and chin midline may be about 2 mm off toward the left side.  Rachel appears to be about 6 mm AP deficient in the maxilla. Chin is back about 4 mm and lower lip is back probably about 6 mm, but this is with her in an open occlusal position with an anterior open bite of 5 to 6 mm.  As Rachel closes into occlusion, she is severely over closed vertically and the chin actually looks slightly prominent.  The lip is shortened significantly and the upper lip is probably no more than about 8 mm in length. Where she is relaxed into her maximal occlusal relationship, she closes vertically about 10 mm.  Intraorally, Rachel has her permanent first molars, but appears to have her primary teeth in the rest of the areas including two central incisors with severe attrition associated with them, the bilateral primary cuspids, primary first and primary second molars.  She actually has the second molar also erupted in on the left side.  In the upper arch, she appears to have her permanent incisors, second bicuspid, and first molar on the right side with primary C and D remaining.  On the left side, she has a first molar and has a C, D, and E remaining.  Incisal opening counting the 8-10 mm vertical overbite is about 72 mm and excursion movements are about 10 mm in each direction.  In centric relation with the teeth touching, Rachel has a skeletal and occlusal Class III jaw relationship.  In the vertical position where she is reasonably comfortable, she is closer to a Class I position.  Rachel has bilateral posterior crossbites and an anterior crossbite when she is in centric relation.  Oropharyngeal structures look relatively normal except she has moderately enlarged tonsils, but she reports no problems with recurrent sore throats.  The nasal airway appears relatively normal, although the right turbinate is moderately enlarged.  The septum looks normal.  She has no sleep apnea symptoms. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the presence of the following teeth:
    1. Maxillary central incisors, bilateral first molars, and maxillary right second bicuspid. First bicuspids are present, but unerupted.  
    2. She has retained maxillary left C, D, and E and right C and D.
    3. In the lower arch, she is missing the central and lateral incisors, lower first and second bicuspids, and right second molars as well as the maxillary second molars and third molars.

Sinuses appear relatively clear.  She has a stabilizing wire placed on the central incisors.  
Waters view shows that the turbinate on the left side appears somewhat enlarged and may block off some of the airway.  Sinuses look reasonably clear.
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears to have fairly good morphology.  Articular eminence is moderately shallow.  There appears to be good joint space present.  
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle with fairly good morphology.  The joint space looks relatively normal.  The patient actually has healthy joints.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both the condyles.  
Two lateral cephalometric radiographs were taken.  One in centric relation where she is severely over closed in a Class III skeletal and occlusal relationship.  The second lateral cephalogram was taken with the jaws open to where the lips are were just ready to separate.  It shows that she has some AP and vertical maxillary deficiency and AP mandibular deficiency.  Oropharyngeal airway looks reasonably good.  
Basic diagnoses for Rachel would be as follows:
    1. Ectodermal dysplasia.
    2. Maxillary hypoplasia vertically, anteroposteriorly, and transversely.
    3. AP mandibular hypoplasia and anterior vertical hypoplasia.
    4. Class III occlusion in centric relation.
    5. Anterior bilateral posterior crossbites.
    6. Partial anodontia, missing the following permanent teeth:  maxillary bilateral lateral incisors, cuspids, second and third molars as well as the left permanent second bicuspid.  Missing mandibular bilateral four incisors, cuspids, first and second bicuspids, third molars and right second molar.
    7. The patient has the following permanent teeth erupted in the maxillary arch, central incisors, first molars, and right second bicuspid.  The first bicuspids are present, but unerupted.  In the lower arch, she has the permanent first molars and left second molar in position.
    8. The patient has the following primary teeth remaining:  maxillary primary C's, D's, and left E.  She has the following mandibular primary teeth remaining including bilateral A's, C's, D's, and E's. 

Recommended treatment for Rachel would including the following:	
 
    1. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Extract primary D's.
        b. Align and level maxillary arch trying to get the first bicuspids into position.
    2. Surgery Stage 1.  
        a. Bone grafting to anterior mandible to provide adequate bone for subsequent placement of implants.  
    3. Surgery Stage 2. 
        a. Extract the following primary teeth including mandibular A's, C's, D's, and E's as well as the maxillary left E.  
        b. Placement of osteointegrated implants in the edentulous areas.
    4. Restorative dentistry to place provisional crowns on the dental implants.
    5. Surgery Stage 3.
        a. Maxillary osteotomies to advance it approximately 6 mm and down graft it about 3 mm anteriorly and 7 mm posteriorly.
        b. Advance the mandible in a slight clockwise direction. 
        c. Anterior mandibular horizontal osteotomy to lengthen the chin vertically approximately 5 mm.
    6. Restorative dentistry to reconstruct the dentition. 

