ANDREA MICHELLE IRVIN							8/8/05

Andrea is 18 years old, referred by Dr. Harry Ryburn.  She has a history of migraine headaches.  She has had no previous surgeries.  She has had an adverse reaction to penicillin.  She has a history of allergy, sinus problems and asthma problems.  

PRIMARY CONCERNS
    1. Jaws are retruded. 
    2. Headaches.
    3. TMJ pain or discomfort.
    4. Difficulty breathing through the nose.
    5. Predominately a mouth breather. 

Andrea's TMJ problems began to the best of her knowledge about 1 year ago of unknown etiology.  She woke up unable to open her jaws.  She was placed on some physical therapy to try to get her jaws open and that is essentially all the treatment she has had to date.  Etiology of her problems is unknown.  She has no problems with earaches, tinnitus, vertigo or hearing loss.  No other joints bother her.  Cheap earrings do bother her ears.  She gets headaches about 3 times a week at about a level of 3 in the temporal and top of the head.  Sometimes they can escalate into migraine type headaches.  She rates her TMJ pain at a level of 5 and average daily pain at a level of 2.  She rates her jaw function at 1, diet and disability at 0.

MEDICATIONS
    1. Doxycycline for facial reasons.
    2. Advil for headache pain.
    3. Imitrex for migraine headaches.

She is not aware of clenching or bruxing her teeth.

In frontal view, Andrea has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 18 mm.  Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is 6 mm.  Maxillary, mandibular and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  Nasal tip may deviate just slightly off to the left side 1 to 2 mm.  In profile view, upper lip supralabrale has retruded compared to subnasale.  Maxilla is probably at least 6 mm AP deficient.  The chin appears to be retruded about 10 to 15 mm.  There is lip incompetence of about 6 mm.  Chin-neckline is short and chin-neck angle is obtuse and not particularly well defined.  A little bit of fullness in the submental area.  She has an obtuse nasolabial angle.  It does not show a lot of Vermillion.  Intraorally, she has all of her lower teeth back through the second molars.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in place.  Attached gingiva appears good.  There is a little gingival hyperplasia around the left central and lateral incisor.  In the upper arch, she is missing first cuspids bilaterally and has the rest of her teeth back through the second molars.  She has a Class I cuspid relationship.  She has about a 2 mm overbite relationship.  When sleeping, Andrea is predominately a mouth breather and her mother says she sleeps with her mouth wide open.  She is not aware of any problems with snoring.  The oropharynx, soft palate and uvula appear relatively normal.  The tonsils are moderately hyperplastic.  She does not give a history of having sore throat problems, however.  The soft tissue structures look fairly healthy in the oropharynx.  
ANDREA MICHELLE IRVIN			8/8/05				Page 2


Intranasally, she has hypertrophied turbinates that are moderate to severely enlarged compared to the size of the nasal cavity.  She has some septal spurs at the base of the septum extending out laterally being a greater problem on the right side as compared to the left side.  Columella is moderately wide and nostrils appear somewhat constricted.  She states she has no problems with snoring nor daytime somnolence.  Tenderness to palpation around the head and neck area.  Maxilla opening is 44 mm, but without discomfort 35 mm.  Excursive movement to the right 9 mm, to the left 8 mm.  On opening, the left joint seems to function relatively smoothly, but on the right side she has a demonstrable pop at about 20 mm of opening and closing pop at about 15 mm.  With more function, the severity of the clicking decreased.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
Panorex shows the absence of the left third molar and maxillary right third molar.  Mandibular left third molar is present.  She has a 3 x 3 retainer in the lower arch.  Sinuses look relatively clear.  Condyles appear as though there could be a little bit of arthritis there but not the best view to evaluate those.

Waters view shows that the sinuses are clear. Turbinates appear fairly large.  The septum appears relatively straight.  

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears flattened on the posterior aspect with some anterior superior beaking of the condyle.  Decreased superior and posterior joint space and increased anterior joint space.  Articular eminence is moderately steep.

Right TMJ sagittal view shows a condyle that is posteriorly positioned in the fossa and there is decreased vertical joint space as well.  The condyle appears a little bit arthritic on the anterior head and a little bit of sclerosis.  Articular eminence is more shallow on this side as compared to the opposite side.  On opening, there is good translation of both condyles. 

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that she has a Class I occlusion with a high occlusal plane angle and retruded maxilla and mandible.  Oropharyngeal airway measures 6 mm at the soft palate level and about 8 mm at the base of the tongue.  

BASIC DIAGNOSES
    1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation.
    2. Anterior vertical maxillary excess.
    3. AP maxillary deficiency.
    4. Posterior vertical maxillary deficiency.
    5. AP mandibular deficiency.
    6. Hypertrophied turbinates.
    7. Nasoseptal spurs.
    8. Nasal airway obstruction.
    9. Impacted mandibular right third molar.
    10.  Headaches.
ANDREA MICHELLE IRVIN			8/8/05				Page 3


    11.  TMJ pain.
    12.  Missing maxillary first bicuspids. 
    13.  Class I cuspid and Class II molar occlusion.
    14.  High occlusal plane angle. 

RECOMMENDED TREATMENT
    1. Presurgical orthodontics.
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.

    2. Surgery.
        a. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.
        b. Maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla upwards, move it forward, down graft the posterior aspect to level the occlusal plane.  
        c. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to advance the mandible in a counterclockwise direction.  
        d. Bilateral partial turbinectomies.  Surgical removal of mandibular right impacted third molar.

3.  Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
