JOHN ANDREW "ANDY" JAMES							06/19/2008

Andy is 17 years old.  His primary concerns are as follows:

    1. Lower jaw is going forward.
    2. Lower jaw is going off towards the left side.  
    3. Teeth do not fit together. 

Andy has no problems with headaches, TMJ pain, nor myofascial pain.  He has no noises in his joints.  No earaches, tinnitus, nor vertigo.  He is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  

To the best of Andy's knowledge, his jaw problems began when he was about 12 or 13.  He had orthodontics for about 3-1/2 years starting at the age of 11.  He did wear head gear at one point during his treatment.  As his teen years progressed, his lower jaw continued to over develop and shift off towards the left side.  

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Andy has fairly good facial symmetry in the middle and upper third face.  He has some asymmetry in the lower third face.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is about 2 mm.  The maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline.  The nasal tip may be just slightly off to the right side but not too significant.  The mandibular dental midline is shifted about 4 mm to the left of the maxillary dental midline.  The chin is probably about 6 mm off to the left side.  In profile, Andy has some slight AP maxillary deficiency of probably about 3 to 4 mm.  AP projection of the chin actually looks reasonably good.  He has a high mandibular plane angle facial morphology.  Chin neckline is moderate in length with a good chin neck angle.  Intraorally, Andy has all of his lower teeth back through the second molars.  The lower incisors are tipped lingually.  He appears to have adequate attached gingiva.  In the upper arch, Andy has all of his upper teeth back through the second molars.  He has an increased curve of Spee in the upper arch.  He has all of his maxillary teeth back through the second molars. He had his four wisdom teeth removed about 2 weeks ago.  He has a full Class III cuspid relationship on the right side and closer to a Class I on the left side being 2 to 3 mm of Class III.  He has an anterior and left posterior crossbite with a slight open bite of about 0.5 to 1 mm.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal.  Tonsils, however, are moderately enlarged, although they appear uninflamed and not infected.  Intranasally, the turbinates are moderately enlarged and it appears that the nasal airway may be a little bit constricted, particularly on the right side.  The nasal septum may be deviated just slightly off to the right side.  The columella is wide and the nostrils are moderately narrow.  On further questioning, he does breathe through his mouth some.  To palpation, Andy has no tenderness around the head and neck area.  However, on opening, he had a glitch in the right TMJ and on excursion movements he had a definite click in the right joint.  The left joint seemed to function reasonably smoothly. 
RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION.  Panorex shows the absence of all four third molars.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The turbinates looks moderately enlarged.  It is difficult to evaluate the joints, but the right side looks as though the head of the condyle and neck are elongated compared to the left side.  
Waters view shows that the turbinates are moderately enlarged and appear to block off a good part of the airway.  The sinuses look relatively clear.  The septum is relatively straight.  The mandible is deviated off towards the left side.    
Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that appears narrow anteroposteriorly.  The articular eminence is moderately steep.  The condyle appears to be somewhat posteriorly positioned in the fossa.  The condylar head and neck appear as though they may be elongated.  
Left TMJ tomogram shows a condylar head that appears larger than the opposite side.  There appears to be decreased vertical and posterior joint spaces.  The condylar head and neck length may be somewhat elongated.  On opening, there is moderate translation of both condyles.  
Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that Andy has a Class III occlusal and skeletal relationship.  The mandible appears fairly level vertically at the occlusal plane as well as at the inferior border.  Oropharyngeal airway at the soft palate level measures about 8 to 9 mm, at the base of the tongue about 12 mm.  There is a little bit of an adenoid tissue up in the nasopharyngeal area.  
Dental model analysis shows that there is a slight anterior open bite.  Mandibular dental midline is shifted about 4 mm to the left with an anterior and left posterior crossbite.  He has a slight Class III cuspid relationship on the left side by 1 to 2 mm, but on the right side it is almost a full Class III cuspid relationship.  There is a slight anterior open bite of about 0.5 mm to 1 mm.  There is an increased curve of Wilson in the maxillary posterior teeth and an accentuated curve of Spee.  In the lower arch, there is a slightly reversed curve Spee with the lower incisors being at least 2 mm lower than the cuspids.  There is an accentuated curve of Wilson in the lower arch as well as the upper arch.  
Basic diagnoses would be as follows:
    1. Bilateral mandibular condylar hyperplasia with the right side worse than the left side.
    2. Right TMJ articular disc dislocation with early reduction. 
    3. Mandibular deviated prognathism.
    4. AP maxillary deficiency.
    5. Transverse maxillary deficiency. 
    6. Anterior and left posterior crossbite. 
    7. Slight anterior open bite (anteriorly).
    8. Accentuated curve of Spee in the upper arch and reverse curve of Spee in the lower arch.
    9. Accentuated curve of Wilson in the maxillary and mandibular arches.
    10. Class III cuspid relationship on the right side, end-on Class III cuspid relationship on the left side.
    11. Hypertrophied turbinates. 
    12. Partial nasal airway obstruction.   

Recommended treatment would include the following:

    1. Presurgical orthodontics.  
        a. Align and level maxillary arch by aligning the four incisors in an elevated plane level by placing a slight vertical step in the arch wire between the cuspids and the laterals.  Tip lateral incisors roots mesially and cuspid roots distally to make room for interdental osteotomies.
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  
    2. Continue to monitor facial growth and development.
    3. Surgery. 
        a. Bilateral TMJ high condylectomies and articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors.  
        b. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to rotate the mandible back on the facial midline.  
        c. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance it, level it, and correct the transverse discrepancies.
        d. Partial nasal turbinectomies.
    4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion. 

