EARLENE KENDERDINE								07-30-03

Earlene is 56 years old and referred by Dr. William R. Johnson, 2500 S. McGee, #131, Norman, OK  73071.

Patient History

Earlene apparently had significant problems with sleep apnea. In August of 2002, she underwent the following surgical procedures:

    1. Maxillary advancement
    2. Mandibular advancement
    3. Chin advancement
    4. UPPP
    5. Intranasal work probably involving turbinectomy, septoplasty, etc. 

Surgery was performed by Dr. Barry Brooks. She has not done well since then. She apparently developed hepatitis B postsurgery. She had 2 units of blood following surgery. Subsequent donor has been retested, and no evidence of hepatitis occurred. She currently is being seen by Dr. Barry Rogers. Dr. Rogers is a D.O. who has been managing Earlene’s pain. Dr. William Johnson is her dentist. She is also seeing Dr. Joseph Ripperger, who is a psychiatrist. 

Her speech and muscles of facial expression seem to work better in the morning when she wakes up, and she feels the best in the morning. Muscle nerve dysfunctions appear to get worse in the afternoons. She doesn’t feel as though she has good control of her muscles of facial expression in the morning or anytime during the day. It is all pretty much dysfunctional from her standpoint. Dr. Johnson did make her a splint. She got a splint made in February of 2003 by Dr. Johnson. She also saw Dr. Bob Tally in December or January for about six weeks, and he primarily had her involved in physical therapy kind of treatments with no improvement. Earlene gets headaches daily that she registers at about a level of 8 that occur predominantly in the frontal and temporal areas. She has TMJ pain at about a level of 9 on the average, and it is exacerbated to 10 with wide opening and particularly with yawning. She rates her overall daily average pain levels at 8, jaw function at 8, diet at 8, and disability at 9.

She has the feeling of a vice kind of phenomenon in her mouth around the jaw structures and the teeth where it presses and releases and presses and releases. This may be involvement of the buccinator muscles.

It is interesting that three days after surgery, Earlene apparently had no recorded numbness apparently to her lips and chin area.

Patient Concerns

Earlene currently has the following symptoms and problems in no specific order:

    1. Severe pain throughout the head and neck area
    2. Hypersensitivity to the face, jaws, and teeth
    3. Bleeding from nose
    4. Speech impediment
    5. Tinnitus 
    6. Earaches 
    7. Pain is so severe that it wakes her up at night
    8. Hypersensitivity of the teeth
    9. Hypersensitive smell
    10. Hands fall asleep a lot at night and are numb
    11. Feet hurt and burn a lot and also have a prickly feeling and a hot feeling
    12. Cannot chew
    13. Cannot smile 
    14. Yawning creates significantly increased pain
    15. Roof of mouth feels raw
    16. Tongue doesn’t know where to go into a comfortable position
    17. Inside of nose feels raw and painful
    18. Bite has changed

Clinical Examination

In frontal view, Earlene has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry. Upper lip length is about 23 mm. Upper tooth-to-lip relationship is about 3.5 mm. Maxillary midline is pretty much on the facial midline as is the chin. Mandibular dental midline is about a millimeter to the right.
 
In profile view, she has some fairly good facial balance. Some slight fullness in the upper lip. Some fullness in the submental area as well. 

Intraorally, she is missing the mandibular right first bicuspid, first molar. Has her teeth through the second molar on the left side. Left central incisor is blocked out of the arch. There appears to be good attached gingiva. In the upper arch, it appears that she has all of her teeth back through the second molars. Has basically a Class I cuspid relationship bilaterally. A little bit of buccal crossbite tendency on the left side. She is fairly close to having about a 2-mm overbite relationship. To palpation, she has high moderate to severe pain to palpation around the temporalis, masseters, medial pterygoids, TMJs, styloid areas, and moderate pain around the SCMS, posterior neck, and shoulder muscles. Maximal incisal opening is 35 mm, and she can open to about 28 mm without too much discomfort. Excursive movement to the right is 2 mm and to the left 5 mm. 

Intraorally, the oropharynx looks relatively clear. Soft palate has several scars in it from the surgery. It appears well shortened. 

Intranasally, the septum is deviated a little bit off toward the right side. Turbinates may have been reduced in size. The airway looks adequate on both sides with the airway being a little bit larger on the left side as compared to the right side. Re-evaluation of the anterior bone plates and reviewing Dr. Johnson’s x-rays, it appears that the plates may not be fractured but could appear that way because of the extreme bending contours that were used. 

Radiographic Evaluation

Panorex shows the presence of some very large bone plates in the anterior part of the maxilla and smaller plates in the tuberosity area. Also some stainless steel wires in the third molar area. In the lower jaw, there are three bone screws in the ascending ramus on each side. Screws on the left side are positioned lower than on the right side. She also has a chin plate present. Mental foramina are seen, and the bone cuts are below those. It appears that the bone plate on the right side and maybe even the left side anteriorly may be fractured. Cannot determine much from the condyles in this particular view. Some change is present in the inferior border as expected from the procedures performed. 

Right TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that has sort of a hockey stick shape to it. Actually joint space looks fairly well-balanced. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Three bone screws are seen in the mandible and are above the remnants of the canal. 

Left TMJ tomogram shows a condyle that is postured slightly forward in the fossa with an increased posterior joint space. Articular eminence is fairly steep. Three screws are seen in the ascending ramus. They are a little bit closer to the nerve area. 

Waters view shows that the left sinus appears a little bit more radiolucent than the right side, but this could be due to soft tissue in the sinus. The part of the sinus that is still open appears fairly clear. Frontal and ethmoid sinuses appear okay.
Open views show virtually no translation of the condyles.

Lateral cephalometric radiograph shows that there appears to be a good airway. Soft palate has been shortened significantly. Distance from the soft palate to the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 12 mm and from the posterior border of the tongue to the posterior pharyngeal wall measures about 13 mm. Some significant discrepancy in the vertical position of the angle of the mandible from one side to the other side. In trying to reposition her mandible with manipulation, it caused pain mainly in the chin area and submental area and also caused some tenderness to her teeth but not too much to her joints. Dr. Johnson sent some tomograms taken on 07/24/03 that show that the condyle appears to be posteriorly positioned bilaterally in his films. 

Basic Diagnoses

    1. AP maxillary excess
    2. AP mandibular excess
    3. Bilateral TMJ articular disc dislocation 
    4. Severe headaches
    5. Severe TMJ pain
    6. Severe myofascial pain
    7. Generalized neuralgia around jaws, face, head, and neck
    8. Tinnitus
    9. Earaches 
    10. Speech impediment secondary to previous surgery
    11. Severe hypersensitivity in palate and upper and lower teeth
    12. Previously placed hardware with 4 bone plates in the maxilla and 19 screws and 2 stainless steel wires
    13. Previously placed screws in mandible, 3 in each side, for a total of 6 screws
    14. Previously placed bone plate in chin with 4 associated screws
    15. Rule out hypersensitivity to metals
    16. High occlusal plane angle

Recommended Treatment

    1. Refer to Dr. Cohen for pain evaluation and management

    2. Evaluation at the Environmental Center to rule out hypersensitivity to metals used in the bone plates and prostheses

    3. Surgery
    A. Maxillary osteotomies to move the maxilla posteriorly and downgraft it slightly posteriorly
    B. Bilateral mandibular ramus osteotomies to set the mandible posteriorly and decrease the occlusal plane angle
    C. Bilateral TMJ articular disc repositioning and ligament repair with Mitek anchors 
    D. Removal of previously placed bone plates (x 4), bone screws x 25, and stainless steel wires x 2
