STEPHANIE LINER									10/26/2009

Stephanie is 43 years old and referred by Dr. Bill Hang.   Stephanie’s problems began when she was 16 years of age of unknown etiology.  She was a gymnast and may have bumped her jaws some.  She had orthodontics from about the age of 10 through 16.  She had 4 bicuspids extracted.  At 16, she had severe joint pain.  She had seen some doctors back at that time who suggested surgery, but her mother elected not to proceed with that.  It was not until 1995 that she saw Dr. Bruce Sanders and he performed bilateral TMJ arthroscopy.  Prior to seeing Dr. Bruce Sanders, she saw Dr. Jacobson who put her into orthodontic appliances again that really set off her TMJ issues and the braces had to be removed.  She then saw Dr. Sanders.  She felt much better after the arthroscopy.  She has had no further treatment since then, although she has some significant symptomatology yet, it is much better than what it was prior to 1995.  

Primary concerns Stephanie has at this time includes the following:

    1. Headaches.
    2. Neck and shoulder pain.
    3. TMJ pain. 
    4. Difficulties sleeping.
    5. Airway issues. 

Stephanie has been on a CPAP machine for about 2 weeks now and she feels that this is helping her.  She does have some cervical problems that are ongoing.  She has no problems with earaches, but has some moderate tinnitus but no vertigo.  Other joints that bother her include her hips, fingers, ankles, and elbows.  She is not aware of clenching or bruxism.  She is aware, however, during the day that she sometimes has to catch her breath.  She is not sure if this happens at night.  She does have moderate snoring, severe daytime somnolence, and she is not sure if she is a mouth breather or not at night. 

CLINICAL EXAMINATION.  In frontal view, Stephanie has fairly good left-to-right facial symmetry.  Upper lip length is about 22 mm.  Upper tooth lip relationship is 6 mm.  The maxillary, mandibular, and chin midline are all pretty much aligned on the facial midline.  In profile, she is probably about 5 to 6 mm AP deficient in the maxilla and probably at least 12 mm AP deficient in the mandible.  Chin neckline and angle are not well defined.  She has a feeling that her neck cannot support her head.  Intraorally, she is missing probably the lower second bicuspids and upper first bicuspids.  She is a Class II end-on cuspid relationship bilaterally, probably being about 2 mm Class II on the left side and maybe Class III on the right side.  She has an anterior deep bite of probably about 7 mm.  Transversely, the maxillary and mandibular transverse occlusal plane is fairly level.  Oropharyngeal tissues look relatively normal and healthy. She has a small of the septum off to the right side of the nose.  Turbinates appear moderate in size.  To palpation, she had no significant discomfort, but she had some specific points she could push on that caused pain at about a level of 5 in the masseter muscle and about 5 in the TMJ area.  Maximal opening is 42 mm and she could open to that without too much pain.   Excursion movement to the right was 10 mm, to the left 9 mm.  On opening, joints function fairly smoothly except she does have a glitch when initially opening in the right joint.  The left joint seemed fairly smooth.   
Basic diagnoses for Stephanie would be as follows:    

    1. Bilateral TMJ arthritis and articular disc dislocation without reduction and severe degenerative changes.. 
    2. Mandibular AP hypoplasia. 
    3. Maxillary AP hypoplasia but anterior vertical maxillary hyperplasia. 
    4. Class II end-on occlusion.
    5. Anterior deep bite of 7 mm.
    6. Previously extracted four first bicuspids.
    7. TMJ pain.
    8. Headaches.
    9. Myofascial pain. 
    10. Severely decreased oropharyngeal airway with an AP dimension of 3 mm (normal 11 mm).

Recommended treatment would be as follows:

    1. Presurgical orthodontics.  
        a. Align and level maxillary arch.  Open up spaces for the first bicuspids.  Tip lateral incisor roots mesially and cuspid roots for interdental osteotomies, if they are necessary. 
        b. Align and level mandibular arch.  Try to upright the root on the mandibular left second bicuspid.  
    2. CT scan of jaws and jaw joints (TMJ Concepts protocol).
    3. Surgery. 
        a. Bilateral TMJ reconstruction and mandibular advancement with TMJ Concepts total joint prostheses. 
        b. Multiple maxillary osteotomies to advance the maxilla, move the anterior aspect superiorly approximately 4 mm, and correct any transverse discrepancy that may be present. 
        c. Bilateral coronoidotomies. 
        d. Bilateral TMJ fat grafts (harvest from the abdomen).
        e. Consider placement of osteointegrated implants on the maxillary first bicuspid spaces.
        f. Consideration for extracting maxillary second molars.
    4. Postsurgical orthodontics to refine occlusion.
    5. Restorative dentistry.
        a. Placement of implants, if not done at the initial surgery.
        b. Placement of crowns.
